
ROMULAN IMPERIAL SENATE
[Romulan Senate building]

SURAN (OC): Senators, consider the opportunities for the Empire. At last the destinies of the planets, Romulus and Remus, will be united. Shinzon of Remus is offering us a chance to make ourselves stronger...
[Romulan Senate chamber]

SURAN: ...than ever before. It would be madness to resist it. I beg you to not let prejudice or politics interfere with this alliance. By joining Shinzon's forces with ours not even the Federation will be able to stand in our way.
HIREN: That's enough! The decision has been made. The military does not dictate policy on Romulus.
(a female senator, Tal'aura, looks down at a red circular box on the table in front of her)
HIREN: The Senate has considered Shinzon's proposal and rejected it. He and his followers will be met with all deliberate force and sent back to that black rock they come from. Do I make myself clear!
COMMANDER #2: Yes sir.
(the two commanders leave)
TAL'AURA: If you will excuse me, Praetor, I have an appointment with the Tholian ambassador.
HIREN: Of course. ...Senators, are there any others who wish to speak? ...Then I call for a vote on the motion to open trade negotiations with Celles Two.
(the red box begins to open)
HIREN (OC): As you know the Reman mines have not been filling their quotas for months now. I hope you will all bear in mind the trade committee's findings.
(a green spiralling double-helix column of light rises from the open red box)
HIREN: As much as we don't want...
(as everybody present watches, transfixed, the column explodes, raining dust down on them. The red box closes)
HIREN: Would someone alert security? Bring back Senator Tal'aura.
(everybody in the chamber shrivels to rocks and dust)
[Earth - Alaska pavilion]

PICARD: Duty. ...A starship captain's life is filled with solemn duty. I have commanded men in battle. I have negotiated peace treaties between implacable enemies. I have represented the Federation in first contact with twenty-seven alien species, but none of this compares to my solemn duty today ...as best man. Now, I know that on an occasion such as this it is expected that I be gracious and fulsome in my praise on the wonders of this blessed union. But have you two considered what you are doing to me? Of course you're happy, but what about my needs? This is all a damned inconvenience, and while you're happily settling in on the Titan, I will be training my new first officer. You all know him. He's a tyrannical martinet who'll never, ever allow me to go on away missions!
DATA: That is the regulation, sir. Starfleet Code. Section twelve. Paragraph four...
PICARD: Data!
DATA: Sir?
PICARD: Shut up.
DATA: Yes sir.
(general laughter)
PICARD: Fifteen years I've been waiting to say that!
(more laughter)
PICARD: No, seriously, Will, Deanna, there's still time to reconsider. ...Yes?
RIKER/TROI: No.
PICARD: No? Oh very well then. ...Will Riker, you have been my trusted right arm for fifteen years. You have kept my course true and steady. ...Deanna Troi, you've been my guide ...and my conscience. You have helped me recognise the better parts of myself. You are my family. ...And in best maritime tradition ...I wish you both clear horizons. ...My good friends, ...make it so. ...The bride and groom.
ALL: The bride and groom.
(the band starts playing and dancing starts)
LAFORGE: Did you ever think about getting married again?
GUINAN: No, twenty-three was my limit. ...Worf? Are you all right?
WORF: Romulan ale should be illegal.
LAFORGE: It is.
TROI: That was a lovely toast.
PICARD: It was from the heart.
TROI: And you needn't worry. I'm going to brief your new counselor on everything she needs to know.
PICARD: Like I know you are! You already know too much about me, ...but I take it there will be no speeches during the ceremony on Betazed?
RIKER: No, no speeches and ...no clothes.
DATA: Ladies and Gentlemen and invited transgendered species. In my study of Terran and Betazoid conjugal rites I have discovered it is traditional to present the happy couple with a gift. Given Commander Riker's affection for archaic musical forms I have elected to present the following as my gift, in honour of ...their conjugation.
DATA: 'Never saw the sun shining so bright. Never saw things going so right. Noticing the days hurrying by.'
(the band comes in)
DATA: 'When you're in love, my how they fly. Blue skies, smiling at me,'
WORF: ...Irving Berlin!
DATA: 'Nothing but blue skies do I see...'
[Enterprise-E bridge]

TROI: It's tradition, Worf! You of all people should appreciate that.
WORF: I will not do it!
PICARD: Won't do what, Mister Worf?
WORF: Captain, I do not think it is appropriate for a Starfleet officer to appear ...naked.
PICARD: Oh, come now! A big, handsome, strapping fellow like you? What can you be afraid of?
(Worf's console bleeps)
WORF: Captain, I am picking up an unusual electromagnetic signature from the Kolarin system.
PICARD: What sort of signature?
WORF: Positronic.
LAFORGE: It's very faint but I've isolated it to the third planet in the Kolarin system.
PICARD: What do we know about it?
LAFORGE: Uncharted. We'll have to get closer for a more detailed scan.
PICARD: Theories?
DATA: Since positronic signatures have only been known to emanate from androids such as myself, it is logical to theorise there is an android on Kolarus Three.
PICARD (OC): Just what I was afraid of.
RIKER: Captain, diverting to the Kolarin system takes us awfully close to the Romulan Neutral Zone.
PICARD: It's still well on our side. I think... I think it's worth taking a look. Don't worry, Number One, we'll still have you to Betazed with plenty of time to spare...
RIKER: Thank you, sir.
PICARD: ...where we will all honour the Betazoid tradition. ...Now, if you’ll excuse me, ...I’ll be in the gym.
RIKER: Mister Branson, lay in a course for the Kolarin system. Warp five.
LAFORGE: What do you think, Data? ...A long-lost relative?
(the Enterprise arrives in orbit above Kolarus III)
LAFORGE: I'm reading six distinct positronic signatures, spread out over a few kilometres on the planet's surface.
PICARD: What do we know about the population of Kolarus Three?
DATA: Isolated pockets of humanoids. It appears to be a pre-warp civilisation in an early stage of industrial development.
LAFORGE: Captain, I wouldn't recommend using the transporter. That ion storm doesn't look very neighbourly. It could head in our direction without much warning.
PICARD: Understood. ...Data, Mister Worf, you're with me.
RIKER: Captain, I don't have to remind you....
PICARD: I appreciate your concern, Number One, but I've been itching to try the Argo.
RIKER: I'll bet.
PICARD: Captain's prerogative. There's no foreseeable danger ...and your wife would never forgive me if anything were to happen to you.
PICARD: You have the bridge, ...Mister Troi!
(the Argo shuttlecraft heads for the surface of Kolarus III)
[Kolarus III surface]

(when the Argo lands the rear door drops down and a 'dune-buggy' shoots out with Picard at the wheel)
DATA: I will always be puzzled by the human predilection for piloting vehicles at unsafe velocities.
DATA: Over that rise, sir, ...half a kilometre.
(Picard parks the vehicle and they get out)
DATA: The radiant electromagnetic field is interfering with my tricorder, but we are within a few metres of the signal.
PICARD: Fan out. Let's search around.
(a hand comes out of the sand and grabs Worf's leg)
DATA: It appears to be a robotic arm.
WORF: Very astute!
PICARD: Mister Worf, bring it to the vehicle.
(they continue to search for the other positronic signatures, finding a leg and a torso)
PICARD: This doesn't feel right.
(the search continues)
DATA: The final signature is approximately one hundred metres to the north, sir.
(they arrive at the location and find an android's head lying on the ground)
WORF: it's you!
DATA: The resemblance is ...striking.
(the head's eyes flicker and Data picks it up)
DATA: Fascinating! Fascinating!
(they are disturbed by weapons fire from a group 'dune-buggies' coming over the hill)
PICARD: To the vehicle! ...I think it's time to try some unsafe velocities!
B-4 HEAD: Why do you have a shiny head?
DATA: This is not the appropriate time for a conversation.
B-4 HEAD: Why?
DATA: Because the Captain has to concentrate on piloting the vehicle.
B-4 HEAD: Why?
DATA: Because...
PICARD: Data!
DATA: Sorry sir.
(Data puts down the head)
B-4 HEAD: Have I said something wrong?
(local inhabitants are swarming around the Argo. Data uses a remote control to launch it. The pursuit continues)
PICARD: Data.
(Data brings the Argo ahead of the 'dune-buggy' and gets it hover beyond a precipice. The 'dune-buggy' flies off the precipice and back into the Argo. The pursuers stop on the precipice and reveal themselves to be Reman)
[Enterprise-E engineering laboratory]

CRUSHER: You know, all things considered, Data, I think you have nicer eyes.
DATA: Our eyes are identical, Doctor.
RIKER: So what have we got, Geordi?
LAFORGE: Well, I'd say he has the same internal mechanics as Data but not as much positronic development. The neural pathways aren't nearly as sophisticated. I’d say he's a ...prototype. Something Doctor Soong created prior to Data.
DATA: Do you have a name, sir?
B-4 HEAD: I am ...B-4.
PICARD: Be-four? Doctor Soong's penchant for whimsical names seems to have no end.
DATA: Can you tell us how you came to be on the planet where we found you?
B-4 HEAD: I do not know.
DATA: Do you remember anything of your life before you were on the planet?
B-4 HEAD: No. Why does the tall man have a furry face?
PICARD: Number One, keep me informed, and ...Geordi reassemble him.
LAFORGE: Aye sir.
DATA: B-4, Do you know who I am?
B-4 HEAD: You are me.
DATA: No. My name is Data. I am your brother.

[Enterprise-E ready room]

PICARD: Tea, Earl Grey, hot.
RIKER (on intercom): Captain, you have an alpha priority communication from Starfleet Command.
PICARD: Acknowledged.
PICARD: Admiral Janeway. How good to see you again.
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): Jean Luc, ...how'd you like a trip to Romulus?
PICARD: With or without the rest of the fleet?
JANEWAY (OC): A diplomatic mission. We've been invited, believe it or not.
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): It seems there's been some kind of internal political shake-up. The new Praetor, someone called Shinzon,...
JANEWAY (OC): ...has requested a Federation envoy.
PICARD: New Praetor?
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): There's more. ...He's Reman.
JANEWAY (OC): Believe me, we don't understand it either.
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): Your'e the closest ship so I want you to go and hear what he has to say. Get the lay of the land, If the Empire becomes unstable,...
JANEWAY (OC): ...it could mean trouble for the entire Quadrant.
PICARD: Understood.
JANEWAY (OC): We're sending you all the intelligence we have,...
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): ...but it's not much. I don't need to tell you to watch your back, Jean Luc.
PICARD: Hardly.
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): The Son'a, the Borg,...
JANEWAY (OC): ...the Romulans. ...You seem to get all the easy assignments!
PICARD: Just lucky, Admiral.
JANEWAY (OC): Let's hope...
JANEWAY (on viewscreen): ...that luck holds. Janeway out.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Helmsman, lay in a new course. Take us to Romulus. Warp eight.
HELM OFFICER: Aye aye, sir. Course plotted and laid in.
RIKER: Romulus?
PICARD: I'm afraid the Opal Sea will have to wait, Number One. Engage.
[Enterprise-E observation lounge]

DATA: As you can see one side of Remus always faces the sun. Due to the extreme temperatures on that half of their world, the Remans live on the dark side of the planet. ...Almost nothing is known about the Reman homeworld, although intelligence scans have proven the existence of dilithium mining and heavy weapons construction. ...The Remans themselves are considered an undesirable caste in the hierarchy of the Empire.
RIKER: But they also have the reputation of being formidable warriors. In the Dominion War, Reman troops were used as assault forces in the most violent encounters.
PICARD: Cannon fodder.
LAFORGE: Yeah, but how did a Reman get to be Praetor? I don't get it.
RIKER: We have to assume Romulan collaborators.
PICARD: Coup d'état?
RIKER: The Praetor's power's always been the Romulan fleet. They must be behind Shinzon for him to have overthrown the Senate.
PICARD: What have you learned about Shinzon?
DATA: Starfleet intelligence was only able to provide a partial account of his military record. We can infer he is relatively young and a capable commander. He fought twelve major engagements in the war. All successful. Beyond that, we know nothing.
PICARD: Well, ...it seems as though we're truly sailing into the unknown. Keep at it. Anything you can give me will be appreciated. Dismissed.
[Enterprise-E engineering laboratory]

LAFORGE: I still can't believe the Captain went along with a memory download.
DATA: Captain Picard agrees that the B-4 was probably designed with the same self-actualisation parameters as myself. If my memory engrams are successfully integrated into his positronic matrix, he should have all my abilities.
LAFORGE (OC): Yes, but he would have all your memories as well. Do you feel comfortable with that?
DATA: I feel nothing, Geordi. It is my belief that with my memory engrams he will be able to function as a more complete individual.
LAFORGE: An individual more like you, you mean.
DATA: Yes.
LAFORGE: Maybe he's not supposed to be like you, Data. Maybe he's supposed to be exactly the way he is.
DATA: That might be so, but I believe he should have the opportunity to explore his potential.
LAFORGE: Okay ...we're done.
DATA: B-4, do you know where you are?
B-4: I am in a room ...with lights.
DATA: Can you remember ...our father?
B-4: Our father?
DATA: Yes, Doctor Soong.
B-4: No.
DATA: Do you know the name of the Captain of this vessel?
B-4: Captain? ...No.
LAFORGE: Data, he's assimilating a lot of programming. Remember, he's a prototype, a lot less sophisticated than you are. We just don't know if his matrix will be able to adapt. We really need to give him some time.
DATA: Geordi, what purpose does this serve?
LAFORGE: What?
DATA: This.
LAFORGE: That's a redundant memory port. Maybe the provisional memory storage is in case his neural pathways overload? ...Do you mind if I keep him here for a while. ...Run a few diagnostics?
DATA: No, I do not mind.
B-4: Data...
DATA: No! You must remain with Commander La Forge. He is going to try to and help you.
Captain's log, stardate 56844.9. The Enterprise has arrived at Romulus and is waiting at the designated coordinates. All our hails have gone unanswered. We've been waiting for seventeen hours.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Counselor?
TROI: They're out there, sir.
WORF: Captain, I recommend we raise shields.
PICARD: Not yet, Mister Worf.
RIKER: Captain, with all due respect to diplomatic protocol, ...the Federation Council isn't sitting out here, we are.
PICARD: Patience. Diplomacy is a very exacting occupation. We will wait.
DATA: Captain.
(on the viewscreen the Scimitar, Shinzon's warbird, is seen to decloak)
WORF: Raising shields.
PICARD: No!
WORF: Captain!
PICARD: Tactical analysis, Mister Worf.
WORF: Fifty-two disruptor banks, twenty-seven photon torpedo bays, primary and secondary shields.
PICARD: She's a predator.
WORF: We are being hailed.
PICARD: On screen.
VICEROY (on viewscreen): Enterprise. We ...are the Reman warbird, Scimitar.
PICARD: Praetor Shinzon, I am pleased to...
VICEROY (on viewscreen): I am not Shinzon. I am his Viceroy. We are sending transport coordinates.
RIKER: Not very chatty.
PICARD: Away team to transporter room four.
[Scimitar - Praetor's chamber]

SHINZON (OC): I hope you'll forgive the darkness. ...We're not comfortable in the light.
PICARD: Praetor Shinzon?
SHINZON: Captain Picard. ...Jean Luc Picard. ...I'd always imagined you taller. Isn't that odd? ...You may scan me without subterfuge, Commander Data.
PICARD: You are not as we imagined you.
SHINZON: No?
WORF: You are human.
PICARD (OC): Why have you asked us to come here?
PICARD: Praetor?
SHINZON: I have never met a human woman.
TROI: I'm only half human.
SHINZON: Deanna Troi, ...of Betazed. Empathic, telepathic abilities, ship's counselor. All this I knew. But I didn't know you were so ...beautiful.
RIKER: You seem quite familiar with our personnel.
SHINZON: Oh I am, Commander Riker. ...May I touch your hair?
PICARD: We came to Romulus on a matter we were assured was of great importance. If you have anything to say to us as representatives of the Federation, I suggest you do it now.
SHINZON: Yes, I'm sorry, Captain. There is so much we need to talk about.
PICARD: I would be interested to know what we're talking about.
SHINZON: Unity, Captain! ...Tearing down the walls between us to recognise that we are one. ...I'm talking of the thing that makes us the same. ...Peace. We want peace. ...Right now, you’re thinking this all sounds too good to be true? But you're also thinking that the chance of peace is too promising to ignore. ...Am I right?
PICARD: Yes.
SHINZON: Then perhaps it's time to add some illumination into our discussion. Computer. Raise the lighting four levels.
(Picard is astounded by Shinzon's facial appearance)
SHINZON: When I was very young I was stricken with an odd disease. I developed a hypersensitivity to sound. Even the slightest whisper caused me agony. No one could do anything about it. Finally I was taken to a doctor who had some experience of Terran illnesses and he diagnosed me with Shalaft's syndrome. ...Do you know it, Captain?
PICARD: ...Yes.
SHINZON: Then you know it's a very rare syndrome. Genetic. Apparently all the male members of a family have it. ...Eventually I was treated and now I can hear as well as you can, Captain. ...I can see as well as you can. I can feel everything you feel. ...In fact, I feel exactly ...what you feel. Don't I, Jean Luc? ...Come to dinner tomorrow on Romulus! Just the two of us. ...Or, should I say, just the one of us.
(Shinzon draws a knife, cuts his hand and hands the knife, with the blood, to Data)
SHINZON: I think you'll be wanting this. 'Til tomorrow then, Captain. We have much to discuss. ...Computer. Return lighting to previous level.
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

CRUSHER: There's no doubt, Captain, right down to your regressive strain of Shalaft's syndrome. He's a clone. ...They probably used a hair follicle or skin cell.
RIKER: Why?
PICARD: I intend to find out, Number One. Inform Starfleet of the situation. I need to know where the hell he came from. ...Counselor.
[Romulan Senate building]

SURAN (OC): We supported you, Shinzon, when you assassinated the Senate. You told us the timing was perfect for an attack on the Federation.

[Romulan Senate chamber]

SURAN (OC): I don't understand why now you delay.
SHINZON: You don't have to understand.
SURAN: And bringing the Enterprise here? What possible purpose could that serve?
SHINZON: I have a purpose.
SURAN: Then perhaps you will enlighten us?
SHINZON: Silence, Romulan! ...You really must learn patience, Commander. ...Spend eighteen
hours every day under the lash of a Romulan guard and you'll soon understand patience.
SHINZON: Now go. ...Commander Donatra, ...please remain. ...There's a word I want you to consider. ...Allegiance. It's something I demand from those who serve me.
DONATRA: Do I serve you?
SHINZON: Yes, and I think, faithfully. ...Commander Suran on the other hand gives me pause.
DONATRA: Here's another word, Praetor. ...Trust. ...Do you trust me? ...How far does that trust extend? ...How deep does it go? ...What must a commander do to prove herself faithful to you? ...What must a woman do?
(Shinzon grabs her wrist and pulls her face close to his)
SHINZON: You are not a woman. You are a Romulan! Serve me faithfully and you will be rewarded. ...Keep those lovely eyes on Commander Suran. And at the first sign of treachery...
DONATRA: ...dispose of him.
SHINZON: Then you will have proven yourself.
(Shinzon releases her)
SHINZON: Now go. ...And Commander! ...If you ever touch me again ...I'll kill you.
(Shinzon seems to have a minor seizure. Donatra turns to see the Viceroy putting his hand on Shinzon's chest.)
[Data's quarters]

(B-4 is sitting in a chair stroking Spot. The console bleeps and he goes to it and begins to type at a very fast rate)
[Romulan Senate chamber]

SHINZON: The Romulans had somehow gained possession of your DNA and I had been created, and when I was ready they were going to replace you with me. Put a Romulan agent at the heart of Starfleet. It was a bold plan.
PICARD: What happened?
SHINZON: As happens frequently here on Romulus, a new government came to power. They decided to abandon the plan. They were afraid that I might be discovered and that it would lead to war. ...Not quite the face you remember.
PICARD: Not quite.
SHINZON: A lifetime of violence will do that. They broke my nose, my jaw. ...But
so much is the same. The eyes, surely you recognise the eyes.
PICARD: Yes.
SHINZON: Our eyes reflect our lives, don't they? And yours, so confident!
PICARD: So I'm not as tall as you expected?
SHINZON: I had always hoped I would be two metres.
PICARD: As had I.
PICARD: How did you end up on Remus?
SHINZON: They sent me there to die. How could a mere human survive...
[Romulan Senate building - night ...and into the dilithium mines montage]

SHINZON (OC): ...the dilithium mines? Not that it mattered, as I was no longer part of their plans against the Federation. In those terrible depths lived only the damned. Together with the Reman slaves I was condemned to an existence of unceasing labour and starvation under the brutal heel of the Romulan guards. Only the very strongest had any hope of survival. I was only a child when they took me.
[Romulan Senate chamber]

SHINZON: ...Then I didn't see the sun or stars again for nearly ten years. The only thing the Romulan guards hated more than the Remans... 
[...back to the dilithium mines montage]

SHINZON (OC): ...was me. But one man took pity on me. ...The man that became my Viceroy. He protected me from the cruelty of the guards. He taught me how to survive. And in that dark place where there was nothing of myself, I found my Reman brothers.
[Romulan Senate chamber]

SHINZON: They showed me the only true kindness I had ever known.
PICARD: You're doing this to liberate the Remans.
SHINZON: That is the single thought behind everything I have done. From building the Scimitar at a secret base to assembling my army. Finally coming to Romulus in force. I knew they would never give us our freedom. I would have to take it!
PICARD: But how many Romulans died for your freedom?
SHINZON: Too many. But the point is finally the Empire is realising there is a better way. And that way is peace. ...You don't trust me.
PICARD: I have no reason to.
SHINZON: You have every reason. If you had lived my life and experienced the suffering of my people, you’d be standing where I am.
PICARD: If you had lived my life you would understand my responsibility to the Federation. I cannot allow my personal feelings to unduly influence my decisions.
SHINZON: All I have are my personal feelings. I want to know what it means to be human. The Remans have given me a future. You can tell me about my past.
PICARD: I can tell you about my past.
SHINZON: Were we Picards always warriors?
PICARD: I think of myself as an explorer.
SHINZON: Well, were we always explorers?
PICARD: I was the first Picard to leave our solar system. It caused quite a stir in the family, but I'd spent my youth...
SHINZON: ...looking up at the stars, dreaming about what was up there, about...
PICARD: ...new worlds. ...I'm trying to believe you, Shinzon. ...If there is one ideal the Federation holds most dear is that all men, all races, can be united. ...What better example. A Starfleet captain standing in the Romulan Senate. ...Nothing would make me more proud than to take your hand in friendship. In time, ...when that trust has been earned.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

WORF: Sir, we have had an unauthorised access into the main computer.
PICARD: Source?
LAFORGE: It's going to take some time to figure that out, Captain. The data stream was rerouted through substations all over the ship.
PICARD: What programs were accessed?
LAFORGE: Well, ...that's what I can't figure out. It's mostly just basic stellar cartography, star charts, communications protocols, uplinks from colony tracking stations. It's not even restricted material.
PICARD: Nevertheless we must learn the source. Keep me informed.
LAFORGE: Captain, there is something else. I was reviewing the sensor logs. Look at this! When the Scimitar decloaked there was a momentary spike in the tertiary EM band. There! ...You're not going to believe this. It's thalaron.
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

PICARD: I thought thalaron radiation was theoretical.
LAFORGE: Which is why our initial scans didn't pick it up. He's got it.
PICARD: Thalaron research was banned in the Federation because of its bioqenic properties.
CRUSHER: It has the ability to consume organic material at the subatomic level. I can't overestimate the danger of thalaron radiation, Jean Luc. A microscopic amount could kill every living thing on this ship in a matter of seconds.
PICARD: I understand. Keep on it. I want to know what he has and how to neutralise any threat.
...I need options.
[Romulan Senate chamber]

VICEROY: This was a mistake. We're wasting time.
SHINZON: My ..time and I shall spend it how I choose.
VICEROY: Do not forget our mission, Shinzon. We must act. Now!
SHINZON: We'll return to the Scimitar. I was merely curious about him.
[Picard's quarters]

(Picard is looking at a photograph of himself as a Starfleet cadet, Shinzon's double)
PICARD: Come. ...Beverly, come in. ...Remember him?
CRUSHER: He was a bit cocky as I recall.
PICARD: He was a damn fool. Selfish, ambitious, very much in need of seasoning.
CRUSHER: He turned out all right.
PICARD: I really wanted to believe Shinzon. ...But this thalaron radiation just can't be explained away. ...Whatever he's after, it isn't peace.
CRUSHER (OC): Is he very much the way you were?
PICARD: ...Oh yes.
DATA (on intercom): Data to Captain Picard.
PICARD: Go ahead, Data.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

DATA: Captain, Geordi and I have identified the source of the unauthorised computer access. And, I believe, we have found a way to gain a tactical advantage.
PICARD (on intercom): On my way.
[The Riker's quarters]

TROI: Will, as ship's counselor I recommend you come and get some sleep.
RIKER: Some honeymoon!
TROI: Come to bed.
(they go to bed)
RIKER: Imzadi.
(Troi suddenly believes it is Shinzon, not Riker and recoils)
SHINZON: Imzadi. ...He can never know you as I can. He can never touch you as I can.
TROI: This isn't real!
SHINZON: Feel my lips.
[Romulan Senate chamber]

(Shinzon is kneeling and the Viceroy stands behind him with his hands on Shinzon's head)
[The Riker's quarters]

(Troi's perception of Shinzon morphs into the Viceroy)
VICEROY: I'm with you, Imzadi. I'll always be with you now.
TROI: This isn't real!
RIKER: What's the matter?
TROI: No!
RIKER: Deanna? ...Deanna? ...Deanna!
TROI: No!
[Romulan Senate chamber]

VICEROY: The bond has been broken.
SHINZON: Find her again.
REMAN OFFICER: Praetor, we've received the transponder signal.
(Shinzon has another turn)
VICEROY: It's accelerating. You have no more time for games.
SHINZON: Have the doctors prepare.
[Romulan Senate chamber transporter room]

SHINZON: Transport!
(B-4 materialises)
SHINZON: Begin the download.
(Reman engineers open a panel in B-4's neck and connect him to a computer using the redundant memory port)
SHINZON: Tea, ...hot.
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

CRUSHER: Aside from slightly elevated levels of adrenalin and serotonin, you're completely normal.
PICARD: Deanna, can you describe it?
TROI: It was a... It was a violation. ...Shinzon's Viceroy seems to have the ability to reach into my thoughts. I've become a liability. I request to be relieved of my duties.
PICARD: Permission denied. If you can endure more of these assaults, I need you at my side now, more than ever. The Enterprise is far from Federation space and...
(Picard is beamed out)
RIKER: Worf! Shields up!
(the Scimitar cloaks)
[Scimitar brig]

SHINZON: Hello, Jean Luc.
PICARD (OC): Why am I here? Why have you done this?
SHINZON: I was lonely.
PICARD: What are you going to do?
SHINZON: I need a sample of your blood. ...What is it your Borg friends say? Resistance is futile. ...Oh yes, The android. The bait you couldn't refuse.
PICARD: All of this so you could capture me?
SHINZON: Don't be so vain. After we found it, we had to make a few modifications. An extra memory port. A hidden transponder. I've now gained access to Starfleet's communications protocols. I now know the exact location of your entire fleet. ...You may go.
B-4: Where?
SHINZON: Out of my sight.
PICARD: What is all this about?
SHINZON: It's about destiny, Picard. It's about a Reman outcast...
PICARD: You're not Reman.
SHINZON: And I'm not quite human. So what am I? My life is meaningless as long as you're still alive. What am I while you exist? A shadow? An echo?
PICARD: If your issues are with me then deal with me. This has nothing to do with my ship. Nothing to do with the Federation.
SHINZON: Oh, but it does. We will no longer bow before anyone as slaves. Not the Romulans and not your mighty Federation. We ...are a race bred for war. And conquest.
PICARD: Are you ready to plunge the entire Quadrant into war to satisfy your own personal demons?
SHINZON: It amazes me how little you know yourself.
PICARD: I'm incapable of such an act.
SHINZON: You are me! ...The same noble Picard blood pumps through our veins. Had you lived my life, you'd be doing exactly as I am. So look in the mirror, See yourself. ...Consider that, Captain. I can think of no greater I torment for you.
PICARD: Shinzon, ...I'm a mirror for you as well.
SHINZON: Not for long, Captain. ...I'm afraid you won't survive to witness the victory of the echo over the voice.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

LAFORGE: His cloak is perfect. ...No tachyon emissions, no residual antiprotons.
RIKER: Keep at it, Geordi. Find a way in.
[Scimitar brig]

B-4: Praetor Shinzon needs the prisoner.
(B-4 disables the Reman guard)
PICARD: About time, Mister Data!
DATA: My mission was a success, sir. I have located the source of the radiation. This entire ship is essentially a thalaron generator. It's power relays lead to an activation matrix on the bridge.
PICARD: It's a weapon?
DATA: It would appear so.
PICARD: What about the download?
DATA: Shinzon believes he has our communication protocols. They will give him inaccurate locations for all Starfleet vessels.
PICARD: Good work.
DATA: Sir, ...Geordi supplied me with the prototype for the emergency transport unit. I recommend you use it, sir, to return to the Enterprise.
PICARD: It will only work for one of us.
DATA: Yes sir.
PICARD: We'll find a way off, together.
[Scimitar bridge]

VICEROY: It is time for the procedure.
[Scimitar corridor]

DATA: Move, puny human animal.
PICARD: A bit less florid, Data.
[Scimitar brig]

(Shinzon sees the stunned guard)
SHINZON: Kill him.
[Scimitar corridor]

(a klaxon begins to sound)
DATA: This way, sir! There is a shuttlebay ninety-four metres from our current position.
(they encounter some guards and a firefight develops)
DATA: There it is, sir!
PICARD: Go!
(while Data tries to access the shuttlebay, Picard attempts to hold off the attackers)
PICARD: Data!
DATA: It appears to have an encrypted security system.
PICARD: Alacrity would be appreciated, Commander.
DATA: Reman is really a most complex language with pictographs representing certain verb roots...
PICARD: While I find that fascinating, Data, we really need that door open!
(the doors open and once inside Picard uses his disruptor to weld the doors together)
[Scimitar shuttlebay]

DATA: According to the ship's manifest they are Scorpion-class attack fliers.
[Scorpion cockpit]

PICARD: Data, what do you imagine this is?
DATA: Port thruster, sir. Would you like me to drive, sir?
PICARD: Data, can you open the shuttlebay doors?
DATA: Negative, sir. They have erected a forcefield around the external portals.
PICARD: Well then, ...only one way to go.
DATA: Do you think this is a wise course of action, sir?
PICARD: We're about to find out, Data. ...Power up the disruptors.
DATA: Ready, Captain.
PICARD: Fire!
(the Scorpion's disruptors blast open the doors to the corridor and the Scorpion exits)
[Scimitar corridors]

(Picard negotiates the Scorpion through the Scimitar, smashes into the Praetor's chamber and out through the circular window)
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Tractor beam, now!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Worf! Lock on transporter!
WORF: I have them, sir.
(the Enterprise warps out of orbit)
[Romulan Senate chamber]

SURAN: This has gone far enough!
SHINZON (on viewscreen): I thought we'd discussed patience, Commander.
[Scimitar bridge]

SURAN (on viewscreen): Mine is wearing thin! We supported you because you promised action. And yet you delay.
SHINZON: The Enterprise is immaterial! They won't even make it out of the Neutral Zone, ...and in two days the Federation will be crippled beyond repair. Does that satisfy you?
[Romulan Senate chamber]

SURAN: For the moment.
SHINZON (on viewscreen): And when I return, you and I shall have a little talk about showing proper respect!
TAL'AURA: What's happening to his face?
DONATRA: Commander, a moment. Are you truly prepared to have your hands drenched in blood? He's not planning to defeat Earth. He's planning its annihilation. ...And his sins will mark us and our children for generations.
[Enterprise-E ready room]

CRUSHER: The more I studied his DNA the more confusing it got. Finally I could only come to one conclusion. ...Shinzon was created with temporal RNA sequencing. He was designed so that at a certain point, his aging process could be accelerated to reach your age more quickly. He was going to need to skip thirty years of his life, but when the temporal sequencing wasn't activated his cellular structure started breaking down. ...He's dying.
PICARD: Dying? ...Can anything be done for him?
CRUSHER: Nothing except a complete transfusion from the only donor with compatible DNA. ...You.
PICARD: How long does he have?
CRUSHER: Well I can't say for sure, ...but the rate of decay seems to be accelerating.
PICARD: ...Then he'll come for me.
[Data's quarters]

(B-4 is standing in a restraint. Data activates him with a jewellers screwdriver)
B-4: Brother, ...I ...cannot move.
DATA: No, I have only activated your cognitive and communication subroutines.
B-4: Why?
DATA: Because you are dangerous.
B-4: Why?
DATA: You have been programmed to gather information that can be used against this ship.
B-4: I ...do not ...understand.
DATA: I know. ...Do you know anything about Shinzon's plans against the Federation?
B-4: No.
DATA: Do you have any knowledge of the tactical abilities of his ship?
B-4: No. ...Can I move now?
DATA: No.
B-4: What are you doing?
DATA: I must deactivate you.
B-4: For how long?
DATA: ...Indefinitely.
B-4: How long is that?
DATA: ...A long time, brother.
[Enterprise-E observation lounge]

LAFORGE: It's called a cascading biogenic pulse. The unique properties of thalaron radiation allow the energy beam to expand almost without limit. Depending on the radiant intensity it could encompass a ship, ...or a planet.
PICARD: He could only have built a weapon of such scope for one reason. He's going after Earth.
TROI: How can you be certain?
PICARD: I know how he thinks.
RIKER: Destroy humanity. You cripple the Federation.
PICARD: The Romulans invade...
RIKER: No way of penetrating his cloak?
LAFORGE: No.
RIKER: So he could pass within ten metres of every ship in Starfleet and they'd never know.
CRUSHER: We do have one advantage though. He needs your blood to live. He might come after you first.
PICARD: I'm counting on it. We've been ordered to head to sector ten forty-five. Our fleet has diverted to meet us there.
RIKER: Strength in numbers?
PICARD: At least that's what we hope. ...He must not be allowed to use that weapon. All other concerns are secondary. ...You understand me?
RIKER: Yes sir.
PICARD: All hands. Battle stations!
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Initiate the forcefield!
Captain's Personal log, supplemental. We're heading toward Federation space at maximum warp. The crew has responded with the dedication I've come to expect of them. And like a thousand other commanders on a thousand other battlefields, I wait for the dawn.
[Scimitar bridge]

(the Viceroy puts his hand on Shinzon's chest)
SHINZON: How long?
VICEROY: A matter of hours. We must begin the procedure now.
SHINZON: How long until we reach the Rift?
VICEROY: Seven minutes.
(the Scimitar is in immediate pursuit of the Enterprise)
[Enterprise-E Astrometrics]

PICARD: Data, what's our current position? ...How soon until we reach the fleet?
DATA: At our current velocity we will arrive at sector ten forty-five in approximately forty minutes.
PICARD: 'For now we see but through a glass darkly'
DATA: Sir?
PICARD: He said he's a mirror.
DATA (OC): Of you, sir?
PICARD: Yes.
DATA: I do not agree. Although you share the same genetic structure, the events of your life have created a unique individual.
PICARD: If I had lived his life, is it possible I would have rejected my humanity?
DATA: The B-4 is physically identical to me, although his neural pathways are not as advanced. But even if they were, he would not be me.
PICARD: How can you be sure?
DATA: I aspire, sir, to be better than I am. B-4 does not. Nor does Shinzon.
DATA: We are passing through the Bassen Rift. The projection will return when we have cleared it.
PICARD: It's interfering with our uplink from Starfleet cartography?
DATA: The Rift effects all long-range communications.
PICARD: Commander Riker! Evasive maneuvers!
(the Enterprise is hit and more photon torpedoes streak towards it)
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Target weapons systems and shields. I don't want the Enterprise destroyed.
(hits on the Enterprise take down the warp core and the Scimitar decloaks)
SHINZON: Can you learn to see in the dark, Captain?
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Report.
RIKER: He's firing through the cloak. We can't get a lock.
LAFORGE: He hit our warp drive with his first shot. We've only got impulse, Captain.
PICARD: Mister Worf, prepare a full phaser spread, zero elevation. All banks on my mark. Scan for shield impacts. Stand by photon torpedoes.
WORF: Aye sir.
PICARD: Fire!
(the Scimitar cloaks again)
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: You're too slow, old man. Attack pattern Shinzon Theta.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DATA: We are losing dorsal shields.
PICARD: Full axis rotation to port! Fire all ventral phasers!
WORF: Minimal damage to the Scimitar.
RIKER: Defensive pattern Kirk Epsilon. Get the shields online, Geordi.
LAFORGE: I'm already on it.
PICARD: Counselor Troi, report to the bridge.
WORF: Captain, we are being hailed.
PICARD: On screen.
SHINZON (on viewscreen): Captain Picard, will you join me in your ready room?
[Enterprise-E ready room]

SHINZON: You can't trace my holographic emitters, Captain, so don't bother. And you can't contact Starfleet. It's just the two of us now, Jean-Luc. ...As it should be.
PICARD: Why are you here?
SHINZON: To accept your surrender. I can clearly destroy you at any time. Lower your shields and I'll allow you to transport to my ship.
PICARD: And the Enterprise?
SHINZON: I have little interest in your quaint vessel, Captain.
PICARD: Look at me, Shinzon. ...Your heart, your hands, your eyes are the same as mine. The blood pumping within you, the raw material is the same. We have the same potential.
SHINZON: That's the past, Captain.
PICARD: It can be the future. Buried deep within you, beneath all the years of pain and anger there is there is something that has never been nurtured. The potential to make yourself a better man, and that is what it is to be human. To make yourself more than you are. ...Oh yes, I know you. ...There was a time you looked at the stars and dreamed of what might be.
SHINZON: Childish dreams, Captain, lost in the dilithium mines of Remus. I am what you see now.
PICARD: I see more than that. I see what you could be. ...The man who is Shinzon of Remus and Jean Luc Picard could never exterminate the population of an entire planet! He is better than that!
SHINZON: He's what his life has made him!
PICARD: And what will he do with that life? Waste it in a blaze of hatred? There is a better way.
SHINZON: It's too late.
PICARD: Never! Never! You still have a choice! Make the right one now!
SHINZON: I can't ...fight what I am!
PICARD: Yes you can!
SHINZON: I'll show you my true nature. Our nature. And as Earth dies, remember that I will always, forever, be Shinzon of Remus! And my voice shall echo through time long after yours has faded to the dim memory.
[Scimitar bridge]

REMAN OFFICER: Two ships decloaking, sir! Romulan!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Captain! ...Just when I thought this couldn't get any worse.
WORF (OC): We are being hailed.
PICARD: On screen.
DONATRA (on viewscreen): Captain Picard, Commander Donatra of the warbird Valdore. Might we be of assistance?
PICARD: Assistance?
DONATRA (on viewscreen): The Empire considers this a matter of internal security. We regret you've become involved.
PICARD: Commander, when this is over, I owe you a drink.
(the Valdore rocks from a blast)
DONATRA (on viewscreen) Romulan ale, Captain. Let's get to work.
PICARD: You heard the lady. Let's go to work.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Mister Worf, coordinate our attack with the Valdore's tactical officer. Triangulate all fire on any shield impacts.
WORF: Aye sir.
DATA: Aft shields down to forty percent.
RIKER: Keep our bow on the Scimitar. Auxiliary power to forward shields.
LAFORGE: Aye sir.
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Target the flanking warbird. All forward disruptor banks on my mark.
(one warbird is destroyed)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DATA: Forward shields down to ten percent.
RIKER: Bring us about!
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Drop cloak on the aft port quadrant. Prepare for full emergency stop.
VICEROY: What?
SHINZON: You heard me!
[Valdore bridge]

DONATRA: He's losing his cloak! Stand by all forward disruptor banks!
[Scimitar bridge]

VICEROY: She's almost on us.
SHINZON: ...Not yet.
VICEROY: Praetor!
SHINZON: Full Stop! Fire!
(Shinzon has a turn as the Valdore takes a big hit)
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Restore the aft cloak and bring us about.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DONATRA (on viewscreen): I'm afraid that drink will have to wait, Captain.
PICARD: Do you have life support?
DONATRA (on viewscreen): For the moment. But we're dead in the water.
PICARD: Understood.
(the Enterprise takes a series of hits)
DATA: We are losing structural integrity on decks twelve through seventeen, sections four through ten.
LAFORGE: Emergency forcefields are holding.
RIKER: Evacuate those decks and reroute field power to forward shields.
TROI: Captain, I think I may have a way to find them.
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Prepare a lateral run. All starboard disruptors.
(the Viceroy suddenly stiffens)
SHINZON: What is it? ...What is it?
VICEROY: She's here!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

(Troi's hand is on Worf's as they use the photon torpedo targeting display to beam her thoughts to the Scimitar)
TROI: He's resisting me.
[Scimitar bridge]

VICEROY: No!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

TROI: Remember ...me? ...Now!
(Worf instantly fires a full volley of photon torpedoes)
PICARD: Fire at will!
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Prepare a boarding party. ...Bring me Picard!
VICEROY: (to a Reman guard as he exits) You!
SHINZON: Get the cloak back! Target all shield coordinates beta three. All disruptors, fire!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DATA: Captain, we've lost ventral shielding on deck twenty-nine.
PICARD: Divert all power and compensate.
WORF: Intruder alert!
PICARD: Number One.
RIKER: Let's go.
WORF: Security detail to deck twenty-nine.
[Enterprise-E corridor]

WORF: The Romulans fought with honour.
RIKER: Yes they did, Mister Worf.
(a massive firefight develops between the security detail, led by Riker and Worf, and the Viceroy and the boarding party. The Viceroy disappears into a Jeffries tube)
RIKER: Worf, cover me!
[Enterprise-E Jefferies tube]

(Riker searches for the Viceroy only to be jumped by him allowing the Viceroy to escape)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

(the bridge is devastated by another attack, the hull is breached until a forcefield seals it)
PICARD: Medical team to the bridge.
(Riker looks for the Viceroy who is striding through the ship)
PICARD: Report.
DATA: We've exhausted our complement of photon torpedoes. Phaser banks are down to four percent, sir.
PICARD: What if we targeted all phasers in a concentrated pattern?
LAFORGE: The Scimitar's shields are still at seventy percent. It would make no difference, Captain.
(they watch the Scimitar through the hull breach)
TROI: What's he doing?
PICARD: He wants to look me in the eye. ...We've got him. ...He thinks he knows exactly what I'm going to do. Geordi, divert all power to the engines. Take it from life support if you have to. Give me everything you've got.
LAFORGE: Ready Captain?
DATA: We're being hailed, sir.
PICARD: Deanna, stand by. ...Open a channel.
SHINZON (on viewscreen): I hope you're still alive, Jean Luc.
PICARD: Oh yes, I am.
SHINZON (on viewscreen) (OC): Don't you think it's time to surrender? Why should the rest of your crew have to die?
PICARD: Shinzon, I don't think I ever told you about my first Academy evaluation. In particular I was thought to be extremely ...over-confident.
SHINZON: Captain, as much as I enjoy listening to you talk, I really think...
PICARD: On my mark, Deanna. ...All hands, brace for impact! ...Engage.
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Hard to port!
(a massive collision as the Enterprise slams into the Scimitar. Meanwhile Riker waylays the Viceroy)
[Scimitar bridge]

SHINZON: Divert all power to engines! ...Full reverse.
(as the ships disengage Riker and the Viceroy fight and with them eventually hanging in a vertical access tunnel Riker kicks the Viceroy free who falls to his death)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Computer. Stand by. Auto-destruct sequence omega. Recognise voice pattern Jean Luc Picard. Authorisation alpha alpha three zero five.
COMPUTER VOICE: Auto-destruct is off-line.
[Scimitar bridge]

REMAN OFFICER: Disruptors are not functional, sir.
SHINZON: Deploy the weapon. Kill everything on that ship. Then set a course for Earth. We must complete our mission.
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Matrix initiated. ...Sequencing procedure for thalaron radiation transfer activated.
SHINZON: Some ideals are worth dying for, aren't they, Jean Luc?
(the thalaron radiation is the same spiralling double-helix column of light as Senator Tal'aura's red box in the Senate chamber)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thalaron intermix procedure initiated. ...Deployment of targeting arms commencing.

[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: How long until he can fire?
LAFORGE: The targeting sequence should take about seven minutes, Captain. When the targeting arms are fully deployed the matrix on the bridge will relay the thalaron radiation to the firing points at the tips. No one on the Enterprise will survive.
TROI: How can he? He'll kill you.
PICARD: It's not about me anymore.
PICARD: Prepare for a site-to-site transport.
LAFORGE: Captain, I don't think there's a transporter...
PICARD: That's an order, Commander.
DATA: Sir, allow me to go.
PICARD: Data, this is something I have to do.
DATA: Sir.
TROI: Let him go.
PICARD: You have the bridge, Commander. Try and put some distance between you and the Scimitar. Now, Mister La Forge.
LAFORGE: Aye sir.
(Picard takes a phaser rifle and transports to the Scimitar)
LAFORGE: That's it! Transporters are down.
DATA: Counselor Troi, please assume command. Geordi, come with me.
(while Picard fights the Remans aboard the Scimitar, Data leaps from a hull breach to the Scimitar after Geordi has momentarily disabled the forcefield)
[Scimitar activation matrix]

SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thalaron intermix level thirty percent.
(Data is climbing on the outside of the Scimitar)
[Scimitar bridge]

SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Four minutes to firing sequence.
(Data opens an access panel)
[Scimitar bridge]

(Picard bursts onto the Scimitar bridge and a firefight starts. Shinzon staggers, the veins swelling on his forehead)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thalaron intermix level fifty percent.
(Picard downs three more Remans)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Three minutes to firing sequence.
(as Picard attempts to get to the matrix controls Shinzon wrestles him down but Picard breaks free)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thalaron intermix level sixty percent.
(Picard realises he's lost his hand phaser and Shinzon comes at him with a knife. They wrestle again and Picard knocks the knife clear)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Two minutes to firing sequence.
(as Shinzon rushes at Picard with another knife, Picard rips a bar off the wall and impales Shinzon on it)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thalaron intermix level eighty percent.
(Shinzon forces himself further onto the bar until he is face-to-face with Picard and can put his hands around Picard's throat)
SHINZON: I'm glad we're together now. ...Our destiny is complete.
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: One minute to firing sequence.
(Data enters)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thalaron intermix level completed.
(Data pushes the dead Shinzon aside)
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Thirty seconds to firing sequence.
(Data puts the emergency transport unit onto Picard's tunic and activates it)
DATA: Goodbye.
SCIMITAR COMPUTER VOICE: Ten, ...nine, ...eight, ...seven, ...six, ...five, ...four, ...three...
(Data fires his phaser at the matrix and the Scimitar explodes
[Enterprise-E bridge]

(Picard has rematerialised)
TROI: Data?
(Riker comes onto the bridge and Troi runs into his arms)
RIKER: Captain?
TROI: It's Data.
LAFORGE: Captain, we're being hailed.
PICARD: On screen. ...Open a channel.
DONATRA (on viewscreen) (OC): This is Commander Donatra of the Valdore. We're dispatching shuttles with medical personnel and supplies.
PICARD: Thank you, Commander.
DONATRA (on viewscreen) (OC): ...You've earned a friend in the Romulan Empire today, Captain. ...I hope, the first of many. Valdore out.
PICARD: Geordi, ...prepare the shuttlebay for arrivals. They... They don't know our procedures. ...Just open the doors.
LAFORGE: I'll take care of it, Captain.
PICARD: You have the bridge, Number One.
[Enterprise-E crew lounge]

(Picard is handing out glasses of Chateau Picard)
TROI: Thank you.
RIKER: Thank you, sir.
PICARD: To absent friends. ...To family.
TROI: Data.
LAFORGE (OC): Data.
RIKER: The first time I saw Data, he was leaning against a tree in the holodeck ...trying to whistle. ...Funniest thing I ever saw. ...No matter what he did he couldn't get the tune right.
RIKER (OC): What was that song? I can't remember the song.
(Transcriber's note - the tune is 'Pop Goes the Weasel')
(the Enterprise is being rebuilt in Spacedock)
[Enterprise-E ready room]

PICARD: Come. ...Will!
RIKER: Permission to disembark, sir.
PICARD: Granted. ...So, where's the Titan off to?
RIKER: The Neutral Zone, sir. We're heading up the new task force. Apparently the Romulans are interested in talking.
PICARD: Well I can't think of a better man for the job. ...If I may, just a word of advice about your first command.
RIKER: Anything.
PICARD: When your first officer insists that you can't go on away missions,...
RIKER: ...ignore him. I intend to. ...Serving with you has been an honour.
PICARD: The honour was mine, Captain.
[Picard's quarters]

PICARD: I don't know if all this has made any sense. I wanted you to know what kind of man he was. In his quest to be more like us ...he helped us to see what it means to be human.
B-4: My... my brother was not human.
PICARD: No, he wasn't. But his wonder, his curiosity about every facet of human nature ...allowed all of us to see the best parts of ourselves. He evolved. He embraced change because he always wanted to be better than he was.
B-4: I...I do not understand.
PICARD: Well, I hope someday you will.
WORF (on intercom): Captain, the warp engines are ready to go on line.
PICARD: I'm on my way. Please inform Commander La Forge.
(B-4 is examining something off Picard's desk)
PICARD: We'll talk later.
B-4: 'Never saw the sun...' 'Never saw the sun...' 'Never saw the sun...'
PICARD: '...shining so bright'
B-4: '...shining so bright. Never saw things...'
PICARD: '...going so right.'
B-4: '...going so right.'



[Ba'ku village hayfield]

(Artim emerges from a pile of hay in a field with children playing hide-and-seek)
BA'KU CHILD: There he is. Let's get him.
[Duck blind control room]

SO'NA COMM VOICE: Area seven to command.
STARFLEET OFFICER #1 (OC): Go ahead.
SO'NA COMM VOICE: We could use another survey team out here, sir.
STARFLEET OFFICER #1: Base to Ensign McCauley and Ensign Gilles, please report to area seven and assist the edaphology team.
McCAULEY/GILLES (on intercom): Acknowledged.
(figures in red isolation suits move amongst the Ba'ku villagers who are unaware of them)
GALLATIN: Admiral Dougherty is waiting for this. Transmit it to the ship.
SO'NA COMM VOICE: Alert, area twelve!
(a phaser shot streaks across the field where the children are playing)
SO'NA COMM VOICE: The android! He's out of control.
GALLATIN: Report.
SO'NA COMM VOICE: He's headed towards the village. We're trying to stop him.
STARFLEET OFFICER: Over there!
GALLATIN: Magnify. ...Hold your fire.
[Ba'ku village - day]

(the children run over a bridge. There are more phaser shots)
ANIJ: What is it? What's happening?
(in the village the pursuing survey team scatter market stalls)
[Duck blind]

CURTIS: Base to Commander Data.
DATA (OC): Rerouting ...micro hydraulic power distribution. ...Regulating thermal overload.
CURTIS: Data! Report to base immediately!
DATA (OC): Transferring positronic matrix functions. ...Engaging secondary protocols.
STARFLEET: He's starting to remove the headpiece.
GALLATIN: All field units. Intercept the android.
(Data in an isolation suit fells two pursuers)
[Ba'ku village - day]

SOJEF: Artim, it's all right.
(Data flings a pursuer into a pond)
SOJEF: Get inside. Now!
(suddenly Data's head appears above a bush to the consternation of the villagers)
SOJEF: Mind yourself there. Everyone get inside. Now! Back to your homes. ...Move it! Now! Move!
DATA: Secondary protocol is active.
[Duck blind]

STARFLEET OFFICER: They can see him.
GALLATIN: Stop him. Now!
CURTIS: Commander Data, stand down. That's an order. I repeat, stand down!
[Ba'ku village - day]

(Data takes a Son'a disruptor from one of the felled pursuers and fires to expose the control room behind the duck blind)
ANIJ: Who are they?
[Picard's quarters]

TROI: It's an M-class planet, population three hundred million.
PICARD: Say the greeting again.
TROI: Yew-cheen chef-faw, ...emphasis on the 'cheen' and the 'faw'.
CRUSHER: You either need a new uniform or a new neck.
PICARD: Yew-cheen chef-faw. My collar size is exactly as it was at the Academy.
CRUSHER: Of course it is.
RIKER: Our guests have arrived. They are eating the floral arrangements on the banquet table.
CRUSHER: I guess they don't believe in cocktails before dinner.
TROI: Oh, my God, are they vegetarians? That's not in here.
PICARD: Better have the chef whip up a light balsamic vinaigrette... something that goes well with chrysanthemums.
[Enterprise-E corridor]

PICARD: Yew-cheen...
TROI: ...chef-faw.
PICARD: Yew-cheen chef-faw.
PERIM (OC): Bridge to Captain Picard.
PICARD: Go ahead, Ensign.
PERIM (OC): Command wants to know our ETA at the Goren system.
PICARD: The Goren system?
RIKER: They need us to mediate some territorial dispute.
PICARD: Oh no! We can't delay the archaeological expedition to Hanoran Two. That'll put us right in the middle of monsoon season.
ENSIGN (OC): Captain.
(Picard is handed a padd)
PICARD: Thank you.
RIKER: The diplomatic corps is busy with Dominion negotiations.
PICARD: Oh, so they need us to put out one more brush fire. Can anyone remember when we used to be explorers?
[Enterprise-E turbolift]

RIKER: Deck ten.
PICARD: Yew-cheen chef-faw.
TROI: Remember, they have a significantly less advanced technology than ours. They only achieved warp drive last year.
CRUSHER: And the Federation Council decided to make them a protectorate so quickly?
PICARD: In view of our losses to the Borg and the Dominion, the Council feels we need all the allies we can get these days.
[Enterprise-E anteroom]

PERIM (OC): Captain on deck!
TROI: You'll be expected to dance with Regent Cuzar.
CRUSHER: Can she mambo?
PICARD: Very funny.
CRUSHER: The Captain used to cut quite a rug.
LAFORGE (on intercom): La Forge to Picard. Captain, I need to talk to you before the reception.
WORF: Captain.
PICARD: Mister Worf!
CRUSHER: Worf!
PICARD: What the hell are you doing here?
WORF: I was at the Manzar colony...
RIKER: He's a little late, Geordi, ...can it wait?
LAFORGE (on intercom): I don't think so.
PICARD: Excuse me. Tell him I'm already here and I'll talk to him when he arrives.
RIKER (OC): Geordi, the Captain would like you to come up here.
LAFORGE (on intercom): Tell him we've received a communiqué from Admiral Dougherty. It's about Data.
[Enterprise-E banquet room]

(a string quartet of crewmembers plays Hayden)
PICARD: Yew-cheen chef-faw, Regent Cuzar. Welcome aboard the Enterprise.
CUZAR: Captain Picard, may I welcome you in the time-honoured tradition of my people.
(Regent Cuzar presents an alien ceremonial headdress. Picard stoops for her to put it on him)
CUZAR: We are so honoured to be accepted within the great Federation family.
PICARD: We have a dance later, I believe?
CUZAR: I look forward to it.
PICARD: Counselor?...
TROI: Nice bead work.
LAFORGE: Captain. Excuse me. Captain... Captain, Admiral Dougherty's aboard a Son'a ship in sector four four one. He's requesting Data's schematics.
TROI: Is something wrong?
LAFORGE: The message doesn't say.
PICARD: Data should have been back by now. They were only scheduled to observe the Ba'ku village for one week. Geordi, would you set up a secure com-link to the Admiral in the anteroom.
GEORDI: Aye sir.
ADISLO: Captain, Hars Adislo, we met at the Nel Bato Conference last year. Did you ever have a chance to read my paper on thermionic transconductance?
PICARD: Would you excuse me?
[Enterprise-E anteroom]

DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): He's not acknowledging any Starfleet protocols. Not responding to any of our hails.
PICARD: Have you any idea what precipitated his behaviour?
DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): None. Now he's holding our people hostage down there.
PICARD: Well the Enterprise could be at your position in two days, Admiral.
DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): That's probably not a good idea. Your ship hasn't been fitted for this region. There are environmental concerns.
PICARD: What kind of concerns?
DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): We haven't fully identified the anomalies yet. They're calling this whole area the Briar Patch. It took us a day to reach a location where we could even get a signal to you. Just get me Data's schematics. I'll keep you informed. Dougherty out.
PICARD: His emotion chip?
GEORDI: He didn't take it with him. Send the Admiral Data's schematics.
(Picard gestures to an ensign)
FEMALE ENSIGN: Yes sir?
PICARD: Ensign, would you report to the galley and tell the chef to skip the fish course.
FEMALE ENSIGN: Aye sir?
PICARD: I 'd like our guests to depart as soon as etiquette allows. I'm going to ask Worf to delay his return to DS9 so he can join us. We're going to stop by sector four four one on our way to the Goren system.
LAFORGE: They are in opposite directions, sir.
PICARD: Are they?
[Son'a ship body enhancement facility]

RU'AFO: I never should have let you talk me into that duck blind in the first place. Your Federation procedures have made this mission ten times as difficult as it needed to be.
DOUGHERTY: Our procedures were in place to protect the planet's population from unnecessary risk.
RU'AFO: Planet's population. Six hundred people. If you want to avoid unnecessary risks, next time leave your android home.
SO'NA OFFICER #1 (on intercom): Bridge to Ahdar Ru'afo. We're approaching the planet.
RU'AFO: Take us into a high orbit. ...Lie down, Admiral. The girls will take twenty years off your face.
DOUGHERTY: Another time, perhaps.
RU'AFO: Ha, ha, ha. Your self-restraint puzzles me, Admiral. You continue to deny yourself every benefit this mission has to offer.
DOUGHERTY: I prefer to wait until we can share the benefits with all the people of the Federation.
(the ship is rocked by several blasts)
[Son'a ship bridge]

RU'AFO: Report.
SO'NA OFFICER #1: Phaser blast. Unknown origin.
RU'AFO: Raise shields.
(the ship is rocked by another blast)
RU'AFO: Take us out of orbit.
TARLAC OFFICER: Photon torpedoes. Brace for impact!
(several more blasts)
SO'NA OFFICER #1 (OC): The vessel has broken off pursuit, sir.
ELLORAN OFFICER #1: Visual contact!
DOUGHERTY: That's our ship.
(Data circles in a scout ship)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

LAFORGE: Captain, we're about to lose all communications with Starfleet.
PICARD: Do you have everything you need from command?
TROI: I've downloaded all the files on the duck blind mission and the Son'a.
PICARD: (to Riker and Troi) You have two days to become experts. ...Mister Worf, our job is to come up with a plan to safely capture Data.
WORF: I've already had Commander La Forge modify this tricorder with one of Data's actuation servos. Its operational range is only four metres but it will shut him down.
PICARD: Good to have you back, Mister Worf. ...Slow to one-third. Take us in.
[Enterprise library]

RIKER: Half a century ago they conquered two primitive races, the Tarlac and the Ellora, and then integrated them into their culture as a labour class. ...Look at this. The Son'a are known to have produced vast quantities of the narcotic ketracel-white. Their ships are rumoured to be equipped with isolytc subspace weapons outlawed by the second Khitomer Accords.
(Troi has joined Riker at his console and is stroking his shoulder)
TROI: Why would we be involved with these people?
RIKER: Good question.
(she is now tickling the back of his neck)
RIKER: You haven't done that in a long time.
TROI: What?
RIKER: What you're doing to my neck.
TROI: Was I doing something to your neck?
[Worf's quarters]

PICARD (on intercom): Bridge to Commander Worf. ...Worf?
WORF: Captain?
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: I don't know how they do it on Deep Space 9, but on the Enterprise, we still report for duty on time.
(Worf jumps out his bunk, bashes his head)
WORF (on intercom): Sorry sir, I'm on my way.
PICARD: We'll skip the court martial this time. Picard out.
PICARD: When was the last time we aligned the torque sensors.
PERIM: Two months ago, sir.
PICARD: They don't sound right.
LAFORGE: The torque sensors are out of alignment ...by twelve microns. You could hear that?
PICARD: When I was an ensign, I could detect a three-micron misalignment.
DANIELS: Excuse me, sir. The Son'a ship with Admiral Dougherty aboard has entered tracking range.
(Worf has arrived on the bridge)
PICARD: Straighten your baldric, Commander. On screen.
DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): Captain, I wasn't expecting you.
PICARD: This was too important for the Enterprise to be on the sidelines, Admiral.
DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): I wish I had better news. Commander Data attacked us in the mission scout ship yesterday. Ru'afo and I have decided to send in an assault team.
PICARD: Commander Worf and I are working on several tactical plans...
RU'AFO: Your android has turned dangerously violent, Captain. Considerable damage was done to my ship. He must be destroyed.
DOUGHERTY (on viewscreen): I know what Data means to Starfleet, Jean-Luc, but our crew is at the mercy of those people on the planet.
PICARD: If our first attempt to capture Data fails, I will terminate him. ...I should be the one to do it. I'm his Captain ...and his friend.
DOUGHERTY: All right. You have twelve hours, Captain. Then I want you out of the Briar Patch. In the meantime, we'll head out to the perimeter to call for Son'a reinforcements in case you fail.
PICARD: Understood.
DOUGHERTY: Good luck, Captain. Dougherty out.
[Shuttlecraft]

WORF: Sensors are not picking up any ships coming from the surface.
PICARD: Transmit a wide band co-variant signal. That ought to get his attention.
WORF: He must be using the planet's rings to mask his approach.
PICARD: The metaphasic radiation of the rings is in a state of extreme flux. We'll steer clear of those.
PICARD: 'Come out, come out, wherever you are.'
WORF: Sir?
PICARD: Oh, that's something that my mother...
(blasts hit the shuttlecraft)
PICARD: Hold on. ...Open all hailing frequencies. ...Data, this is Captain Picard. Data, please respond!
(Data continues to attack the shuttlecraft)
WORF: If we fire a tachyon burst, it may force him to reset his shield harmonics. When he does, we can beam him out.
PICARD: Make it so.
WORF: Direct hit. He is resetting his shield harmonics.
PICARD: Beam him out!
WORF: He's activated a transport inhibitor.
PICARD: Prepare to enter the atmosphere. We'll use the ionospheric boundary to shake him.
WORF: Scanners are off line!
PICARD: Evasive maneuvers, ...heading one four zero mark three one.
(Data flies the scout ship past the shuttlecraft and makes eye contact with Picard)
PICARD: He can fly a ship. He can anticipate tactical strategies. Clearly his brain is functioning. We've seen how he responds to threats. I wonder how he would respond...
(another shot from Data)
PICARD: Mister Worf, do you know Gilbert and Sullivan?
WORF: No sir. I have not had a chance to meet all the new crewmembers since I have been back.
PICARD: They're composers, Worf, ...from the nineteenth century.
(Picard punches up the words for the song 'A British Tar' onto the console)
PICARD: Data was rehearsing a production of H.M.S. Pinafore just before he left.
PICARD: (singing) 'A British tar is a soaring soul, as free as a mountain bird.'
[Scout ship]

PICARD (on intercom): 'His energetic first should be ready to resist'
[Shuttlecraft]

PICARD: 'a dictatorial word.' Sing, Worf, sing!
[Scout ship]

PICARD (on intercom): 'His nose should pant'
DATA: 'and his lip should curl.'
PICARD (on intercom): 'His cheeks should flame'
DATA: 'and his brow should furl.'
[Shuttlecraft]

PICARD: 'His bosom should heave'
DATA (on intercom): 'and his heart should glow.'
PICARD/WORF and DATA (on intercom): 'and his fist be ever ready'
[Scout ship]

DATA and PICARD/WORF (on intercom): 'for a knock-down blow.'
[Shuttlecraft]

PICARD/WORF and DATA (on intercom): 'His nose should pant'
[Scout ship]

DATA and PICARD/WORF (on intercom): 'and his lip should curl.'
[Shuttlecraft and scout ship flying in planet's atmosphere]

PICARD/WORF/DATA (on intercom): 'His cheeks should flame and his brow should furl. His bosom should heave and his heart should glow'
[Scout ship]

DATA and PICARD/WORF (on intercom): 'And his fist be ready for a knock-down blow.'
[Shuttlecraft]

PICARD: Prepare the docking clamps.
DATA (on intercom): 'His eyes should flash with an inborn fire.'
[Scout ship]

DATA: 'His brow with scorn be wrung. He never should bow down'
[Shuttlecraft]

DATA (on intercom): 'to a domineering frown'
PICARD and DATA (on intercom): 'or the tang of a tyrant tongue.'
PICARD: 'His heart should stamp
[Scout ship]

DATA: 'and his throat should growl.'
[Shuttlecraft]

PICARD: 'His hair should twirl'
[Scout ship exterior]

DATA (on intercom): 'and his face should scowl.'
PICARD (on intercom): 'His eyes should flash'
DATA (on intercom): 'and his breast protrude.'
[Shuttlecraft]

PICARD/WORF and DATA (on intercom): 'And this should be his customary attitude.'
[Shuttlecraft and scout ship flying in planet's atmosphere]

PICARD/WORF/DATA (on intercom): 'His foot should stamp'
[Scout ship]

PICARD/WORF and DATA (on intercom): 'and his throat should growl.'
(Data feels the thump as the docking clamps engage)
PICARD/WORF (on intercom): 'His hair should curl and his face...'
(the two craft, locked together, wrestle in the planet's atmosphere)
[Shuttlecraft]

WORF: Inertial coupling is exceeding tolerance. If we do not release him, he may destroy both vessels.
PICARD: I'm not letting go of him.
(they plunge towards the planet's surface spinning as they go)
WORF: We must stabilise the dampening fields.
PICARD: Reroute emergency power to inertial dampers.
WORF: The auto-sequencer was damaged by phaser fire!
PICARD: Transferring controls to manual.
WORF: Auto-sequencer realigned.
PICARD: Engaging stabilisers.
WORF: Damping field established!
PICARD: Maximum power!
(the two craft skim the ground throwing up earth and grass)
PICARD: Now, Mister Worf!
[Scout ship]

(Worf blows open the hatch into the scout ship and disables Data with the modified tricorder)
WORF: Captain, Commander Data is safely in custody.
[Ba'ku village - day]

(Picard, Troi, Crusher and an away team beam down into the village. The children are playing a game with balls using their feet and arms)
GALLATIN: Captain, Subahdar Gallatin, Son'a Command.
CURTIS: Lieutenant Curtis, attaché to Admiral Dougherty.
PICARD: Are you all right?
CURTIS: We've been treated extremely well.
(Troi is watching the children play)
TROI: They have an incredible mental discipline, clarity of perception.
SOJEF: My name is Sojef, Captain.
PICARD: Jean-Luc Picard. These are my officers, Doctor Crusher, Counselor Troi.
SOJEF: Would you like something to eat?
PICARD: No, we're here to ...rescue them.
SOJEF: As you wish. But I would ask you to disarm yourselves. This village is a sanctuary of life.
PICARD: Prepare the hostages for transport to the ship.
CRUSHER: They should be quarantined before joining the ship's population.
PICARD: We were under the impression they were being held against their will.
ANIJ: It's not our custom to have guests here at all, let alone hold anyone against their will.
SOJEF: The artificial lifeform would not allow them to leave. In fact he told us they were our enemies and that more would follow.
ANIJ: Are you our enemy?
SOJEF: Anij!
PICARD: Our people have a strict policy of non-interference in other cultures. It's our Prime Directive.
ANIJ: Your directive apparently doesn't include spying on other cultures.
PICARD: The artificial lifeform is a member of my crew. Apparently, he was taken ill.
TOURNEL: There was a phase variance in his positronic matrix which we were unable to repair.
ANIJ: I think the Captain finds it hard to believe that we'd have any skills for repairing positronic devices.
SOJEF: Our technological abilities are not apparent because we have chosen not to employ them in our daily lives. We believe when you create a machine to do the work of a man, you take something away from the man.
ANIJ: But at one time, we explored the galaxy just as you do.
PICARD: You have warp capability?
ANIJ: Capability, yes. But where can warp drive take us, except away from here?
PICARD: I ...apologise for our intrusion.
[Enterprise-E ready room]

PICARD: ...and because they have warp capabilities, the consequences to their society are minimal.
DOUGHERTY (on console): You've done a terrific job, Jean-Luc. Now, pack your bags and get the hell out of there. How's Data?
PICARD: In stasis. La Forge is completing the diagnostic.
DOUGHERTY (on console): I'll need all your paperwork tomorrow. We're heading back your way. Set a course to rendezvous with us so you can transfer the crew and equipment on your way out.
PICARD (on console): You're not finished here?
DOUGHERTY: Er... Just a few loose ends to tie up. Dougherty out.
[Troi's office]

TROI: Come in. ...Hi.
RIKER: Got a minute?
TROI: Sure.
RIKER: I need a little counselling.
TROI: Well, there's a first time for everything.
RIKER: So, do I lie down or what?
TROI: Um Well, whatever makes you comfortable, but this isn't one of the usual therapeutic postures.
RIKER: But it is comfortable.
TROI: Why don't you try sitting up?
RIKER: Why don't you try lying down?
(he gives her a peck)
TROI: Well, you're in quite a mood today. Do you really need counselling or did you come down here to play?
RIKER: I think I'm having a mid-life crisis.
TROI: I believe you.
RIKER: I'm not sleeping well.
TROI: Doctor Crusher has something that can take care of that.
RIKER: What I need, I can't get from Doctor Crusher. ...Counselor, do you think it's possible for two people to go back in time to fix a mistake they made?
TROI: On this ship, ...anything's possible.
TROI: Yuk!
RIKER: Yuk?
TROI: I never kissed you with a beard before.
RIKER: I kiss you and you say 'yuk'!
[Enterprise-E corridor]

LAFORGE: I had to reconstruct Data's neural net and replace these. ...They contain memory engrams.
PICARD: How were damaged?
LAFORGE: By a Son'a weapon. There's no doubt about it, Captain. That's what caused Data to malfunction.
PICARD: But the Son'a report claimed they didn't fire until after he malfunctioned.
LAFORGE: Well, I don't believe it happened that way.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

PICARD: Why would they fire at him without provocation?
LAFORGE: All I know is he was functioning normally until he was shot. Then, his fail-safe system was activated.
PICARD: Fail-safe?
LAFORGE: His ethical and moral subroutines took over all of his basic functions.
PICARD: So what you're saying he still knew the difference between right and wrong.
LAFORGE: In a sense, that's all he knew. The system is designed to protect him against anyone who might try to take advantage of his memory loss.
PICARD: And yet he attacked us. And told the Ba'ku that we were a threat. ...Are the implants bothering you?
LAFORGE: No, I'm all right. I'm just tired.
(Geordi opens a panel to reveal Data standing in a restraint. He activates him)
DATA: Geordi? Captain?
PICARD: You're on the Enterprise, Data.
DATA: I seem to be missing several memory engrams. ...There they are.
PICARD: Data, what's the last thing that you remember?
DATA: 'his nose should pant and his lip should curl...'
PICARD: From the mission.
DATA: I was in an isolation suit gathering physiometric data on Ba'ku. My last memory is going into the hills, following some children.
[Ba'ku village - day]

(Artim is sitting up in a tree with another Ba'ku boy and they are playing with a 'palm-pet')
SOJEF: Artim, do you remember where you were on the day of lightning when the artificial lifeform appeared to us?
ARTIM: In the hills, by the dam.
PICARD: Can you show us?
DATA: There is no reason to fear me. I am now operating within normal parameters.
ARTIM: What?
DATA: They fixed me. ...Captain, the boy is afraid of me.
PICARD: It is nothing personal, Data. You have to remember these people have rejected technology.
DATA: I am the personification of everything they have rejected.
PICARD: Until this week, that young man probably never saw a machine, let alone one that walks and talks.
[Riker's quarters - bathroom]

(Troi and Riker are sharing a foam bath and Troi is shaving Riker)
WORF (on intercom): Bridge to Riker.
RIKER: Can I get back to you, Mister Worf?
WORF (on intercom): Admiral Dougherty's on the com-link, sir.
RIKER: Patch him through. ...Yes, Admiral.
[Son'a body facility]

(Ru'afo is on a medical treatment chair having facial treatment)
DOUGHERTY: Why haven't you left orbit?
RIKER (on intercom): Captain Picard is still on the surface, sir.
DOUGHERTY: Doing what?
RIKER (on intercom): He didn't want to leave until we could adequately explain why Data malfunctioned.
[Riker's quarters - bathroom]

RIKER: His future in Starfleet could depend on it.
[Son'a body facility]

DOUGHERTY: Remind the Captain his twelve hours are up.
[Riker's quarters - bathroom]

RIKER: Yes sir.
DOUGHERTY (on intercom): Dougherty out.
[Son'a body facility]

SO'NA DOCTOR: Your body is producing far too many toxins. We've reached the limit of genetic manipulation.
RU'AFO: I won't need any more genetic manipulation if our Federation friends will allow us to complete this mission.
[Ba'ku planet lake - day]

DATA: Tricorder functions are limited due to heavy deposits of kelbonite in these hills.
PICARD: How about a passive radiation scan?
DATA: Curious, there appear to be strong neutrino emissions coming from the lake.
(Data walks into the lake and disappears under the surface)
ARTIM: Can he breathe under water?
PICARD: Data doesn't breathe.
ARTIM: Won't he rust?
PICARD: No.
(Data emerges from the lake a short distance along the beach)
DATA: Captain! ...Captain, I believe I know what is causing the neutrino emission.
(Data climbs onto a dam and opens a sluice gate which begins to drain the lake revealing the holoship)
DATA: The vessel is clearly Federation in origin, Captain.
PICARD: 'Just a few loose ends to tie up.'
SOJEF: We're not interested in such things.
ANIJ: I am.
(Picard and Data climb onto a twin-hulled raft, Anij joins them)
PICARD: It think it would be wiser...
ANIJ: I'm, going with you.
(when they arrive at the holoship Data uses his tricorder to open the doors)
[Holoship]

DATA: It is a holographic projection. ...Incomplete, I might add.
PICARD: What you're seeing is a computer driven image created by photons and forcefields.
ANIJ: I know what a hologram is, Captain. The question is why would anyone want to create one of our village?
PICARD: Data, if you were following the children and discovered this ship...
DATA: It is conceivable I was shot to protect the secret of its existence.
PICARD: Why would they duplicate this village except to deceive the Ba'ku?
ANIJ: Deceive us?
PICARD: To move you off this planet. You go to sleep one night in the village. Wake up the next morning on this flying holodeck transported en masse. In a few days, you're relocated on a similar planet without ever realising it.
DATA: Why would the Federation or the Son'a wish to move the Ba'ku?
PICARD: I don't know.
(suddenly there is a burst of disruptor fire causing Anij to jump into the lake. Picard and Data return the fire downing the Son'a soldier)
PICARD: Computer. End programme. Decloak the vessel.
ANIJ: Help! I can't swim!
(Data and Picard promptly jump in after her)
PICARD: Don't panic.
ANIJ: I've been shot at. Thrown into the lake out of an invisible ship that's come to abduct us. What's there to panic about?
(Data surfaces)
DATA: In the event of a water landing, I have been designed to serve as a floatation device.
[Enterprise-E transporter room]

PICARD: Mister Worf, did the hostages mention a cloaked ship during their debriefing?
WORF: No sir.
PICARD: Debrief them again. ...Have you been in a fight, Mister Worf?
WORF: No sir. It is a gorch.
PICARD: Gorch?
DATA: A pimple, sir.
PICARD: Oh, ...well, it's ...hardly noticeable.
[Enterprise-E corridor]

(when Riker strokes his chin Data realises Riker is now clean-shaven)
RIKER: Smooth as an android's bottom, eh, Data?
DATA: I beg your pardon, sir?
RIKER: Admiral Dougherty wants to know why we haven't left yet.
PICARD: We're not going anywhere.
[Enterprise-E turbolift]

PICARD: Deck five.
RIKER: (referring to Worf's gorch) Klingons never do anything small, do you?
WORF: Doctor Crusher asked to speak to you when you returned.
PICARD: Picard to Crusher.
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

CRUSHER: Captain, the Son'a hostages declined to be examined. I had them confined to quarters.
[Enterprise-E turbolift]

PICARD: And our people?
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

CRUSHER: Not at all. They're fine ...in fact, they're better than fine. Increased metabolism, improved muscle tone, high energy. We should all be so lucky.
[Enterprise-E turbolift]

PICARD: Very good, Doctor. Picard out.
[Enterprise-E corridor]

PICARD: Worf, don't release the Son'a officers until I've talked to Ahdar Ru'afo.
WORF: Aye sir.
DATA: Commander! May I, ...may I?
(Data touches Riker's chin and shakes his head)
[Picard's quarters]

PICARD: Computer. Music. ...No, no, not that. Something Latin.
COMPUTER VOICE: Specify.
PICARD: A mambo. (Picard begins to move to the rhythm)
PICARD: That's more like it.
[Ba'ku home - night]

(Picard knocks at the door, Anij answers it)
PICARD: How old are you?
SOJEF: We came here from a solar system on the verge of self-annihilation, ...where technology had created weapons that threatened to destroy all life. A small group of us set off to find a new home, ...a home that would be isolated from the threats of other worlds. ...That was three hundred and nine years ago.
PICARD: And you haven't aged a day since then?
SOJEF: Actually, I was a good deal older when we arrived ...in terms of my physical condition.
ANIJ: There's an unusual metaphasic radiation coming from the planet's rings. It continuously regenerates our genetic structure. You must have noticed the effects by now.
PICARD: We've just begun to. ...I suppose you're seventy-five.
ARTIM: No. I'm twelve.
TOURNEL: The metaphasic radiation won't begin to affect him until he reaches maturity.
PICARD: To most offlanders, what you have here would be more valuable than ...gold-pressed latinum. ...I'm afraid that's the reason that someone may be trying to take your world away from you.
ARTIM: The artificial lifeform was right.
PICARD: If it were not for Data, it's probable that you would be re-located by now.
TOURNEL: How can we possibly defend ourselves?
SOJEF: The moment we pick up a weapon, we become one of them. ...We lose everything we are.
PICARD: It may not come to that. ...Clearly, the architects of this conspiracy want to keep it a secret. Not only from you, but from my people as well. ...I don't intend to let them.
[Ba'ku village - night]

(Picard and Anij are taking a walk)
ANIJ: We've always known that to survive, we had to remain apart. It hasn't been easy. Many of the young people want to know more about the offland. ...They're attracted to stories of a faster pace of life.
PICARD: Most of my people who live that faster life would sell their souls to slow it down.
ANIJ: But not you?
PICARD: There are days!
ANIJ: You don't live up to your reputation as an offlander, Picard.
PICARD: Well, in defence of offlanders, there are many more people like me.
ANIJ: Who wouldn't be tempted by the promise of perpetual youth? ...I don't think so.
PICARD: You give me more credit than I deserve. Well, of course, I'm tempted. Who wouldn't be? ...But some of the darkest chapters in the history of my world involve the forced relocation of a small group of people to satisfy the demands of a large one. I'd hoped we had learned from our mistakes, but ...it seems that some of us haven't.
(Picard pauses to inspect some beautifully handcrafted quilts)
PICARD: This is extraordinary craftsmanship.
ANIJ: It's the work of students. ...They're almost ready to become apprentices. In thirty or forty years, some of them will take their place among the artisans.
PICARD: Apprenticing for thirty years... ...Did your people's mental discipline develop here?
ANIJ: More questions. Always the explorer. ...If you stay long enough, that'll change.
PICARD: Will it?
ANIJ: You stop reviewing what happened yesterday, ...stop planning for tomorrow. ...Let me ask you a question. ...Have you ever experienced a perfect moment in time?
PICARD: A perfect moment?
ANIJ: When time seemed to stop ...and you could almost live in that moment.
PICARD: Seeing my home planet from space for the first time.
ANIJ: Exactly. Nothing more complicated than perception. ...You explore the universe. We have discovered that a single moment in time can be a universe in itself, ...full of powerful forces. ...Most people aren't aware enough of the now to even notice.
PICARD: I wish I could spare a few centuries to learn.
ANIJ: It took us centuries to learn that it doesn't have to take centuries to learn it.
PICARD: There's one thing I don't understand. In three hundred years ...you never learned to swim!
ANIJ: I just haven't got around to it yet. ...I wonder if you're aware of the trust you endanger, Jean-Luc Picard. In my experience, it's unusual for...
PICARD: ...an offlander?
ANIJ: For someone so young.
(they arrive back at Anij's front door. Picard walks across the bridge and spies Geordi standing on a headland as the sun rises. He joins him)
PICARD: Geordi?
LAFORGE: Captain. ...As it turned out there wasn't anything wrong with my implants at all. There was something right ...with my eyes. ...When Doctor Crusher removed the ocular connections, she found that the cells around my optic nerves had...
PICARD: ...started to regenerate.
LAFORGE: It may not last and ...if it doesn't, ...I just wanted, ...before we go, I... You know, I've never seen a sunrise. ...At least not the way you see them.
[Enterprise-E ready room]

RU'AFO: Am I to understand you are not releasing my men, Captain?
PICARD: We found the holoship.
DOUGHERTY: Ru'afo, why don't you let the Captain and me...
RU'AFO: No!
(the skin cracks on Ru'afo's forehead and blood trickles down)
RU'AFO: This entire mission has been one Federation blunder after another. You will return my men or this alliance will end with the destruction of your ship.
(Ru'afo leaves)
DOUGHERTY: You're looking well, Jean-Luc. ...Rested.
PICARD: I won't let you move them, Admiral. I will take this to the Federation Council.
DOUGHERTY: I'm acting on orders form the Federation Council.
PICARD: How can there be an order to abandon the Prime Directive?
DOUGHERTY: The Prime Directive doesn't apply. These people are not indigenous to this planet. They were never meant to be immortal. We'll simply be restoring them to their natural evolution.
PICARD: Who the hell are we to determine the next course of evolution for these people?
DOUGHERTY: Jean-Luc, there are six hundred people down there. We'll be able to use the regenerative properties of this radiation to help billions. ...The Son'a have developed a procedure to collect the metaphasic particles from the planets rings.
PICARD: A planet in Federation space.
DOUGHERTY: That's right. We have the planet. They have the technology. ...A technology we can't duplicate. You know what that makes us? ...Partners.
PICARD: Our partners are nothing more than petty thugs.
DOUGHERTY: On Earth, petroleum once turned petty thugs into world leaders. Warp drive transformed a bunch of Romulan thugs into an Empire. We can handle the Son'a. I'm not worried about that.
PICARD: Someone probably said the same thing about the Romulans a century ago.
DOUGHERTY: With metaphasics, life spans will be doubled. ...An entire new medical science will evolve. I understand your Chief Engineer has the use of his eyes for the first time in his life. ...Would you take that away from him?
PICARD: There are metaphasic particles all over the Briar Patch. Why does it have to be this planet?
DOUGHERTY: It's the concentration in the rings that makes the whole damned thing work. Don't ask me to explain it. I only know they inject something into the rings that starts a thermolytic reaction. When it's over, the planet will be uninhabitable for generations.
PICARD: Admiral, delay the procedure. Let my people look at the technology.
DOUGHERTY: Our best scientific minds already have. We can't find any other way to do this.
PICARD: Then the Son'a can establish a separate colony on this planet until we do.
DOUGHERTY: It would take ten years of normal exposure to begin to reverse their condition. Some of them won't survive that long. Besides, they don't want to live in the middle of the Briar Patch. ...Who would?
PICARD: The Ba'ku. ...We are betraying the principles upon which the Federation was founded. It's an attack upon its very soul. ...And it will destroy the Ba'ku ...just as cultures have been destroyed in every other forced relocation throughout history.
DOUGHERTY: Jean-Luc, we are only moving six hundred people.
PICARD: How many people does it take, Admiral, before it becomes wrong? A thousand? Fifty thousand? A million? How many people does it take, Admiral?
DOUGHERTY: I'm ordering you to the Goren system. I'm also ordering the release of the Son'a officers. File whatever protest you wish to, Captain. ...By the time you do, this will all be done.
[Picard's quarters]

(Picard returns to his quarters and removes the pips from his collar)
[Son'a body enhancement facility]

RU'AFO: Gallatin! So the righteous Starfleet Captain finally released you.
GALLATIN: Yes sir.
RU'AFO: Did you encounter any problems on the surface?
GALLATIN: No sir. ...But it wasn't easy being among them.
RU'AFO: I'm sure. Just don't forget what they did to us. ...We'll have them rounded up in a day or two. We needn't bother with the Federation holoship any more. Just get the holding cells ready.
GALLATIN (OC): Yes sir.
RU'AFO: (to an Elloran attendant)
I'm going to miss these little flesh-stretching sessions of ours, my dear.
[Captain's yacht]

DATA (OC): Re-routing the transport grid to avoid detection was wise, sir. However the transporter is rarely used after oh two hundred hours.
(Geordi and Riker (in uniform), Troi, Worf, Crusher and Data (in civilian clothes) descend on a lift)
TROI: Taking the Captain's yacht out for a spin?
WORF: Seven metric tons of ultritium explosives, eight tetryon pulse launchers, ten isomagnetic disintegrators.
RIKER: Looks like you're planning on doing some hunting?
PICARD: Return to your quarters. ...That's an order.
RIKER: No uniform? No orders.
LAFORGE: Captain. How could I look at another sunrise, knowing what my sight cost these people?
DATA: I feel obliged to point out that the environmental anomalies may have stimulated certain rebellious instincts common to youth which could affect everyone's judgment. ...Except mine, of course.
CRUSHER: Okay, Data, what do you think we should do?
DATA: Saddle up. ...Lock and load.
PICARD: They won't begin the procedure while the planet is still inhabited. So, ...our job is to keep the planet inhabited. Will. Geordi. Go back and put a face on what's happening here. Make the Council 'see' the Ba'ku. It's too easy to turn a blind eye to the suffering of a people you don't know.
RIKER: I'll be back before you know it.
PICARD: We'll hold out as long as we can.
[So'na ship tactical room]

RU'AFO: The injector performs perfectly in every simulation.
GALLATIN: Sir, as the Enterprise left orbit, one of their support craft went down to the surface. It appeared to be the Captain's yacht. Five persons on board.
RU'AFO: We're not waiting until morning. Take the shuttles and get everyone off the surface tonight. ...Gallatin! If Picard or any of his people interfere, ...eliminate them.
[Ba'ku village - night]

TOURNEL: We're leaving the village. Take only what you need. Bring food. We may not be back for days.
DATA: It is a transport inhibitor. ...It will help prevent spaceships from beaming anyone off the surface.
PICARD: These veins of kelbonite running through the hills will interfere with their transporters, and when the terrain forces us away from the deposits, then we'll use transport inhibitors as a compensation. The mountains have the heaviest concentration of kelbonite. Once there it will make transport virtually impossible.
ANIJ: There are caves in those mountains.
PICARD: Then we should be able to hold on for a long time once we're there, but they're not Going to make it easy for us to get there.
DATA: Captain, we have activated the transport inhibitors around the village.
PICARD: Good.
(Son'a shuttlecraft appear in the sky)
PICARD: Let's move these people out!
[Son'a shuttlecraft]

ELLORAN OFFICER #2: Transporters are not functioning.
GALLATIN: They're blocking the beam with some kind of inhibitor. We'll have to locate and destroy them.
[Ba'ku village - night]

SOJEF: (to Artim) You're carrying too much. We have a long climb ahead of us.
(the Son'a shuttles open fire)
WORF: We've lost three transport inhibitors. There's a gap in the field.
(as the Ba'ku flee the attack continues and groups are being transported out. Artim stumbles)
ARTIM: Father!
(Data grabs his hand)
[Son'a ship tactical room]

GALLATIN: They're following the kelbonite deposits. Using the interference to block our transporters.
RU'AFO: Recommendations?
DOUGHERTY: Take me down. Let me talk to Picard.
RU'AFO: Talk! We should send down an assault team and take them by force.
DOUGHERTY: That is not an acceptable option. If people get hurt, all the support we have in the Federation...
RU'AFO: Federation support, Federation procedures, Federation rules. ...Look in the mirror, Admiral. The Federation is old. In the past twenty-four months, they've been challenged by every major power in the Quadrant. The Borg, the Cardassians, the Dominion. They all smell the scent of death on the Federation. That's why you've embraced our offer, because it will give your dear Federation new life. Well, how badly do you want it, Admiral? Because there are hard choices to be made. Now! If the Enterprise gets through with news about their brave Captain's valiant struggle on behalf of the defenceless Ba'ku, your Federation politicians will waver, your Federation opinion polls will open a public debate, your Federation allies will want their say. ...Need I go on?
GALLATIN: There is an alternative to an all-out assault. Isolinear tags would allow our transporters to lock on to them.
RU'AFO: We'd have to tag every one of them. That would take time and we don't have it. The Enterprise is only nineteen hours from communications range with the Federation.
DOUGHERTY: I'll order Riker to turn around.
RU'AFO: Picard's first officer. Do you really believe he'll listen? My ships are capable of intercepting the Enterprise before it reaches the perimeter. I could send them to ...to escort it back, ...but Commander Riker might not want to come.
DOUGHERTY: Send your ships.
[Ba'ku planet foothills]

ARTIM: Do you like being a machine?
DATA: I aspire to be more than I am.
ARTIM: I know why. So people like us won't be afraid of you any more.
DATA: ...Perhaps?
ARTIM: Don't you ever get tired?
DATA: My power cells continually recharge themselves.
ARTIM: I can't imagine what it's like to be a machine.
DATA: Perhaps it would surprise you to know that I have often tried to imagine what it would be like to be a child.
ARTIM: Really?
DATA: Really.
ARTIM: For one thing, your legs are shorter than everyone else's.
DATA: But they are in a constant state of growth. Do you find it difficult to adapt?
ARTIM: Adapt?
DATA: A child's specifications are never the same from one moment to the next. It is a wonder that you do not ...trip over your own feet.
ARTIM: Sometimes I do.
DATA: My legs are exactly eighty-seven point two centimetres in length. They were eighty-seven point two centimetres the day I was created. They will be eighty-seven point two centimetres the day I go off line. My operation depends on specifications that do not change. I will never know the experience of ...growing up or ...tripping over my own feet.
ARTIM: But you've never had adults telling you what to do all the time, ...or bedtimes, ...or having to eat food you don't like.
DATA: I would gladly accept the requirement of a bedtime in exchange for knowing what it is like to be a child.
ARTIM: Do machines ever play?
DATA: Yes, I play the violin ...and my chess routines are quite advanced.
ARTIM: No, I mean, have you ever just played ...for fun?
DATA: Androids do not have fun.
ARTIM: Look, if you want know what it's like to be a child, you need to learn to play.
WORF: Captain!
PICARD: Mister Worf, you need a haircut.
WORF: Accelerated hair growth is often experienced by Klingons during Jak'tahla.
ANIJ: Jak'tahla?
PICARD: Roughly translated, puberty, although for a Klingon that scarcely does it justice. Any severe mood swings, unusual aggressive tendencies, ...you let me know at once.
WORF: Yes sir. The Ba'ku need some rest, sir. According to the geo-scan, this is the safest area within the next few kilometres.
PICARD: Very well. We'll take an hour.
WORF: Aye sir.
ANIJ: Right beyond that ridge is where the caves begin. ...We can hide there for days.
PICARD: By now the Son'a will have scanned the area and know that just as well as we do.
ANIJ: It's been three hundred years since I've seen a bald man.
PICARD: How is it you never married? And don't tell me it's just because you haven't got around to it yet.
ANIJ: What's the rush?
PICARD: I should warn you, I've always been attracted to older women.
[Ba'ku planet foothills - an altered reality]

(everything is in slow motion, the waterfall and the pollen from a flower blown by Anij)
PICARD: How are you doing this?
ANIJ: No more questions.
(they watch a humming bird in slow motion)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PERIM: Commander, I'm showing two Son'a ships on an intercept course.
RIKER: How long 'til they reach us?
PERIM: Eighteen minutes.
LAFORGE: We won't be able to get a transmission out of here for at least another hour.
DANIELS (OC): They're hailing us.
RIKER: Tell them our transceiver assembly's down and we can send messages but not receive them.
DANIELS: I don't think they believe us.
RIKER: Why not?
(the ship shakes from a near miss)
RIKER: Photon torpedo. Isn't that the universal greeting when communications are down?
LAFORGE: I think it's the universal greeting when you don't like someone.
(the ship shakes again)
RIKER: Full impulse.
LAFORGE: The manifolds can't handle full impulse in the Patch, Commander.
RIKER: If we don't outrun them, the manifolds are going to be the only thing left on this ship.
LAFORGE: I'll be in engineering.
RIKER: RED ALERT! All hands. Battle stations!
[Ba'ku planet foothills]

TROI: And have you noticed how your boobs have started to firm up?
CRUSHER: Not that we care about such things in this day and age.
TROI: Uh huh.
CRUSHER: Thank you, Data.
WORF: I have an odd craving for the blood of a live Kolar beast. This environment must be affecting me again.
DATA: And have you noticed how your boobs are firming up? Not that we care about...
(two Son'a shuttles appear over the hill)
WORF: Take cover!
(the shuttles launch the isolinear tags that target individuals and beam them up. The Enterprise crewmembers try to shoot them down)
WORF: Isolinear tags. Their transporters can lock onto them.
PICARD: We have to find shelter.
ANIJ: There's a cavern at the base of the next hill.
PICARD: This way!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: Shields at sixty percent!
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE (on intercom): Engineering to bridge. We're burning deuterium down here. We're going to blow ourselves up. We won't need any help from the Son'a.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: What's inside that nebula cluster?
PERIM: Cometary debris, pockets of unstable metreon gas. We don't want to go in there, sir.
RIKER: Yes, we do. I'll take it from here, Ensign. ...It's time to use the Briar Patch like Br'er Rabbit did.
[Ba'ku planet foothills]

PICARD: Inside the caves! Quickly! ...Everyone! This way!
(Picard, Crusher and Worf continue to shoot down the isolinear tags. Worf's phaser rifle malfunctions so he bats one out of the air with the butt)
WORF: Definitely feeling aggressive tendencies, sir.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: They've detonated an isolytic burst. A subspace tear is forming.
RIKER: On screen.
PERIM: I thought subspace weapons were banned by the Khitomer Accord.
RIKER: Remind me to lodge a protest.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Our warp core is acting like a magnet to the tear. We're pulling it like a zipper across space.
RIKER (on intercom): Options?
LAFORGE: We could eject the core.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Will that stop the tear?
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: You got me, Commander.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Is that your expert opinion?
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Detonating the warp core might neutralise the cascade, but then again it might not. Subspace weapons are unpredictable. That's why they were banned.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS (OC): The tear is closing on us. ...Impact in fifteen seconds.
RIKER: Eject the core.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: I just did.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS (OC): Impact in ten seconds.
RIKER: Detonate!
(the warp core explosion throws the Enterprise clear of the nebula)
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Get me a medic over here!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: It worked, Commander! The tear has been sealed.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Yeah, but there's nothing to stop them from doing it again. We're fresh out of warp cores.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PERIM: We're still thirty-six minutes from transmission range, sir.
RIKER: We're through running from these bastards.
[Ba'ku planet cavern]

DATA: Another forty-three reported taken, sir.
(the cavern shakes violently as the Son'a shuttles target the hill above)
WORF: Captain, they're trying to drive us out so their drones can tag us.
DATA: With all the hydrothermal vents in the substrata, the structural integrity of this cavern is not going to hold for long.
PICARD: Is there any other way out of here?
ANIJ: I don't know.
DATA: Captain, tracking the watercourse may reveal another exit.
PICARD (OC): Mister Worf, come with us.
DATA: I'm reading an oxygen-nitrogen flow behind that calcite formation, Captain.
PICARD: Will this structure hold if we were to blast through?
DATA: I believe it is safe, sir.
PICARD: Fire!
(the three of them blast the calcite formation)
PICARD: Get everybody into those caves ...and set up forcefields once they're inside.
WORF: Aye sir.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Geordi, are those pockets of metreon gas?
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Yes Commander. Highly volatile. I recommend we keep our distance.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Negative. I wanna use the ramscoop to collect as much of it as we can.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: The purpose being?...
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: The purpose being I intend to shove it down the Son'a's throat.
DANIELS: Commander, if one of their weapons hits that gas...
RIKER: It's our only way out of here, Mister Daniels.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: I wouldn't be surprised if history remembers this as the Riker Maneuver.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: If it works. ...Computer. Access manual steering column.
(a joystick pops up out of the console)
RIKER: Transfer helm controls to manual.
LAFORGE (on intercom): Bridge. Storage cells are at maximum capacity.
PERIM: They're powering their forward weapons array, sir.
RIKER: Blow out the ramscoop. Stand by, full thrusters.
LAFORGE (on intercom): Ramscoop released!
(Riker has steered the Enterprise so the released ramscoop collides with the Son'a ship, destroying it)
[Ba'ku planet mountains]

(an assault team of Son'a soldiers is seen on a nearby ridge)
WORF: Captain!
PICARD: Data, Troi, ...keep these people moving.
DATA: Bring them out!
(Worf fires a bazooka-like weapon, an isomagnetic disintegrator, to neutralise the team)
PICARD: I expect it won't be long before the drones get here.
[Ba'ku second cavern]

TOURNEL (OC): Keep moving! ...Keep moving!
(Artim feels in his pocket and, realising he has lost something, turns back)
TOURNEL (OC): There are caves on higher ground. ...We'll be safe there.
[Ba'ku planet mountains]

(Crusher has used her medical tricorder on one of the downed So'na)
CRUSHER: Captain. Take a look at this medscan. ...His DNA profile.
PICARD: How could that be possible?
CRUSHER: Maybe we should ask them.
[Ba'ku second cavern]

(back in the now deserted cavern Artim finds what he searching for, his 'palm-pet'. Anij arrives to find him)
ANIJ: Artim, what are you doing? Come!
(Anij and Artim rush to catch up the rest)
PICARD (OC): Is this the last group?
TOURNEL: Yes.
PICARD: Get them ready to move out. ...We need to hurry.
TOURNEL: Anij went to find Artim.
(Picard goes back, takes Artim from Anij and passes him to Data)
DATA: Go with Tournel!
ARTIM: No I want to stay with you.
DATA: You'll be safer there. Go!
(suddenly there is a rock fall)
WORF: Worf to Picard!
CRUSHER: Two life signs, ...one of them is extremely faint.
TROI: There are almost four metric tons of rock blocking our way.
(she aims a phaser at the rock fall)
WORF: No! That might cause another cave-in.
(they start to dig with their hands)
PICARD: Anij. ...Anij?
WORF (on intercom): Worf to Picard.
PICARD: Yes, yes I can hear you.
WORF (on intercom): We're trying to get to you, sir.
PICARD: Anij? ...Help is on the way. ...Worf, hurry, Anij is hurt.
CRUSHER (on intercom): How bad is she, Captain?
PICARD: I'm losing her.
CRUSHER (on intercom): We're coming as fast as we can.
PICARD: Anij, ...stay with me. ...Help me find the power to keep you in this moment. ...Stay with me. ...Don't let go of this moment.
(Picard and Anij are rescued having experienced another altered reality)
CRUSHER: She's stabilising.
PICARD: Is it safe to move her?
CRUSHER: Safer than leaving her here.
ANIJ: And you thought it would take centuries to learn.
[Ba'ku mountains over a lake]

(as they exit the cavern five drones hover and, although some are shot down, Picard and Anij are transported)
[Son'a ship brig]

DOUGHERTY: Order them to surrender, and I promise you won't be court-martialled.
PICARD: If a court-martial is the only way to let the people of the Federation know what is happening here, I welcome it.
RU'AFO: The Enterprise has destroyed one of my ships. The other is on fire, requesting assistance.
PICARD: The Enterprise would only fire to defend itself. Ru'afo must have ordered the attack. I can't believe he would have given that order without your consent, Admiral. ...I wonder which of us will be facing that court-martial.
DOUGHERTY: There is nothing further to be gained from this.
RU'AFO: You're right. This is going to end now. The Ba'ku who want to stay on the planet. Let them. I'm going to launch the injector.
DOUGHERTY: You're not going to launch any...
RU'AFO: In six hours, every living thing in this system will be dead or dying.
PICARD: You would kill your own people, Ru'afo? ...Your own parents, ...brothers, sisters. ...Didn't you know, Admiral? The Son'a and the Ba'ku are the same race.
SOJEF: Picard just told us. Our DNA is identical. ...Which one were you? Gal'na... Ro'tin...
RU'AFO: Those names, those children are gone forever.
DOUGHERTY: What's he talking about?
SOJEF: A century ago, a group of our young people wanted to follow the ways of the offlanders. They tried to take over the colony and when they failed...
RU'AFO: And when we failed, you exiled us to die slowly.
ANIJ: You're Ro'tin, aren't you? ...There's something in the voice. (turning to Gallatin) ...Would you be his friend Gal'na? ...I helped your mother bathe you when you were a child. She still speaks of you.
PICARD: You brought the Federation into the middle of a blood feud, Admiral. The children have returned to expel their elders, just as they were once expelled. Except that Ru'afo's need for revenge has now escalated to parricide.
DOUGHERTY: It was for the Federation. It was all for the Federation.
[Son'a ship body enhancement facility]

DOUGHERTY: We're taking this ship out of here. This mission is over.
RU'AFO: It is not over.
DOUGHERTY: It is over!
(Ru'afo strikes Dougherty and hurls him over a railing)
RU'AFO: I do not take orders from you.
(the fight continues an Ru'afo throws Dougherty onto the treatment chair)
DOUGHERTY: If you launch the injector while the planet's still populated, the Federation will pursue you until...
RU'AFO: The Federation ...will never know what happened here.
(Ru'afo lowers the head collar and switches it on. Dougherty facial skin stretches to breaking point and he eventually dies)
[Son'a ship bridge]

RU'AFO: Admiral Dougherty will not be joining us for dinner. Deploy the collector. ...Do you have a problem with that order?
GALLATIN: May I talk to you alone?
RU'AFO: Deploy the collector.
SO'NA OFFICER #1 (OC): Yes sir.
[Son'a ship ready room]

GALLATIN: Moving them is one thing. Killing them all...
RU'AFO: No one hated them more than you, Gal'na. ...We've come a long way together. This is the moment we've planned for so many years.
[Son'a ship bridge]

RU'AFO: Separate the Starfleet personnel and secure them in the aft cargo hold. ...See that Picard joins them.
GALLATIN: The shields in that section won't protect them against the thermolytic reaction.
RU'AFO: Thank-you for reminding me.
(the Son'a collector ship deploys it's sails)
[Son'a ship brig]

ANIJ: Jean-Luc!
GALLATIN: Come with me.
[Son'a ship corridor]

PICARD: It must have been strange for you when you were a hostage. Surrounded by all the friends and family you knew all those years ago. Each one looking exactly as they did then. Like ...looking through the eyes of childhood again. And here you are closing those eyes, trying not to see what bitterness has done to the Son'a. How it's turned Ru'afo into a madman. And you? ...It's turned you into a coward. ...A man who denies his own conscience.
GALLATIN: Get in! ...Get in.
[Son'a ship turbolift]

PICARD: A coward without the moral courage to prevent an atrocity. ...You offend me.
GALLATIN: Is this how a Federation officer pleads for his life?
PICARD: I'm not pleading for my life, ...I'm pleading for yours. You can still go home, Gal'na.
GALLATIN: Computer. Close turbolift doors. ...What you're asking me to do is impossible.
PICARD: Do you know how to disable the injector?
GALLATIN: But I would need to be on the bridge. The crew is loyal to Ru'afo. An assault would fail.
PICARD: Perhaps we can lure him away.
GALLATIN: It doesn't matter where he is. As soon as he realises something's happening, he'll override my commands with one word to his com-link.
PICARD: ...If he doesn't realise something's happening? Can you get me to a transmitter? I need to speak with Data and Worf down on the planet. We'll need their help.
GALLATIN: Deck twelve.
[Son'a ship bridge]

RU'AFO: Initiate separation protocols.
TARLAC OFFICER: Activating injector assembly.
ELLORAN OFFICER #1: Separation in three minutes.
SO'NA OFFICER #2: A small craft is coming up from the surface. It's powering up its weapons.
RU'AFO: On screen.
SO'NA OFFICER #1 (OC): One person aboard. It's the android.
RU'AFO: He's no threat.
[Captain's yacht]

DATA: Data to Picard.
[Son'a ship conduit]

PICARD: Go ahead, Data.
[Captain's yacht]

DATA: Captain, they're ignoring my attack.
[Son'a ship conduit]

PICARD: Keep firing tachyon bursts into their shield grid. Is Worf in position?
[Captain's yacht]

DATA: Yes sir. He is ready for simultaneous transport.
PICARD (on intercom): We're approaching the bridge. Picard out.
[Son'a ship bridge]

ELLORAN OFFICER #1: Separation in one minute.
SO'NA OFFICER #1: Sir, the Federation ship is creating a disruption in our shields.
SO'NA OFFICER #2: If they go out of phase, it will increase our exposure to the thermolytic reaction.
RU'AFO: Very well. Destroy that ship Reset our shield harmonics. Do not delay the countdown.
[Captain's yacht]

DATA: Data to Picard. They are rotating the shield harmonics. I am attempting to return to the surface, sir.
[Son'a ship bridge]

TARLAC OFFICER: The Federation ship has been disabled.
ELLORAN OFFICER #1: Separation in twenty seconds.
(the Son'a bridge suddenly lights up very brightly for three seconds)
RU'AFO: What is that?
TARLAC OFFICER: I don't know.
SO'NA OFFICER #1: The systems don't seem affected.
ELLORAN OFFICER #1: Separation in fifteen seconds. ...Five seconds.
TARLAC OFFICER: The injector assembly has separated.
RU'AFO: Exactly as the simulations predicted.
SO'NA OFFICER #2: I'm not showing any change in metaphasic flux levels.
RU'AFO: Your scanners must be malfunctioning.
SO'NA OFFICER #2: All ship functions are off-line.
RU'AFO: How can there be no ship functions if the viewscreen is working. ...Artificial gravity is stable. ...Life support is...
RU'AFO: A holodeck!
(he fires his disruptor at the walls and ceiling revealing a holodeck grid)
[Holoship cockpit]

RU'AFO: We were transported to the holo-ship when we reset our shields. Everything we saw was an illusion. ...Ru'afo, authorisation delta two one, ...override all interlink commands to injector assembly one.
SO'NA COMPUTER VOICE: Unable to comply. Injector assembly one has been de-activated.
RU'AFO: Aarrgh!
[Son'a ship bridge]

WORF: All injector sub-systems aboard the collector are confirmed off-line.
PICARD: Decloak the holo-ship and engage a tractor beam.
WORF: Aye sir.
[Holoship cockpit]

SO'NA OFFICER #3: The crew knows something's happened I've secured the bridge.
RU'AFO: This ship is equipped with fourteen long-range transporters. Are they all useless?
TARLAC OFFICER: They must have been locked and secured after we were beamed here.
RU'AFO: Isolate one and re-route its command sequence through the auxiliary processor.
SO'NA OFFICER #3: Sir, there's nothing we can do... they already have control of our ship.
RU'AFO: I don't plan on going back to our ship.
[Son'a ship bridge]

PICARD: Mister Worf, destroy that thing.
WORF: Aye sir. ...Weapons systems have been taken off-line.
GALLATIN: The crew is rerouting bridge controls.
WORF: Captain, there is a problem aboard the collector. The launch sequence has resumed.
GALLATIN: The collector shields have been raised. Someone's on board. ...It's Ru'afo!
PICARD: Can you override the launch sequence from here?
GALLATIN: Not without his access codes.
PICARD: Is there a self-destruct?
GALLATIN: Yes, but without the code it would have to be activated at the upper control matrix on the collector.
PICARD: Mister Worf, try to find some way to beam through those shields.
GALLATIN: It has to be detonated manually. There'll only be a two second delay.
WORF: We may be able to transport between the shield generators if we are within one hundred metres.
PICARD: Take us into position. ...Remain at your post, Commander. I need you to beam me back.
(Picard takes a phaser rifle from Worf)
GALLATIN (OC): We're approaching the collector.
GALLATIN: One minute before the separation you'll see the cryogenic tanks venting. Weapons fire may ignite the exhaust.
[Son'a collector ship]

SO'NA COMPUTER VOICE: Separation in two minutes and fifteen seconds.
(Ru'afo is working at the upper control matrix console in a high gallery showing countdown 2:09)
SO'NA COMPUTER VOICE: Intruder alert.
(Picard is beamed in and a firefight develops between him and Ru'afo around the galleries)
[Son'a ship bridge]

(the Son'a ship's crew break into the bridge and overpower Worf and Gallatin)
WORF: Captain!
[Son'a collector ship]

PICARD: Worf?
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: I'm picking up Captain Picard's bio-signature aboard the collector.
RIKER: Enterprise to Picard.
[Son'a collector ship]

PICARD: Number One.
RIKER (on intercom): We're approaching your position. Do you need assistance?
PICARD: I may need a lift in a minute or so!
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: We're on our way.
[Son'a collector ship]

SO'NA COMPUTER VOICE: Separation in one minute.
(Picard rides a hoist out to the upper control matrix console where the countdown time is 0:58 and he begins to work on it)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

(a blast hits the ship)
RIKER: Report!
DANIELS: It's Ru'afo's ship.
RIKER: On screen.
PERIM: Sensors are reading over a hundred Ba'ku on board ...and one Klingon.
RIKER: Target their ventral engines and life support. Set a collision course.
[Son'a collector ship]

RU'AFO: Stop!
(Ru'afo is pointing his disruptor at Picard)
PICARD: Ru'afo, we're getting too old for this.
RU'AFO: After today ...that won't be a problem ...for either of us.
SO'NA COMPUTER VOICE: Separation in thirty seconds.
PICARD: You're really going to risk igniting the exhaust? ...All right I will!
(Picard fires his phaser rifle)
RU'AFO: No!
(the shock caused leaves Ru'afo swinging from a girder)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: Shields at sixty percent!
RIKER: Hold your course.
[Son'a ship bridge]

GALLATIN: He wouldn't?
(he sees Enterprise on the viewscreen on a collision course)
WORF: Yes, he would.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: Now!
(the Enterprise veers away at the last second getting off two shots at the Son'a ship)
[Son'a collector ship]

(the countdown reaches 0:09)
RIKER (on intercom): Stand by, Captain. We're right around the corner.
PICARD: Sorry, time's up.
(Picard inserts the final key in the upper control matrix console and fire begins to spread through the collector. As the Enterprise flies past and Picard is beamed out, Ru'afo is engulfed in the flames before the collector explodes)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: What kept you, Number One?
RIKER: The Federation Council has asked me to inform you that the Ba'ku relocation will be halted, while they conduct a top-level review.
DANIELS: Sir, Ru'afo's ship is hailing us.
PICARD/RIKER: On screen.
WORF (on viewscreen): Captain, the Son'a crew would like to negotiate a cease-fire. It may have something to do with the fact that we have three minutes of air left.
PICARD: We have plenty over here, Mister Worf. Prepare to beam aboard.
[Ba'ku planet foothills]

(Troi, among the returning Ba'ku, waves up to Riker who waves in return)
RIKER: Do you think when we get away from this metaphasic radiation it'll change the way we feel?
WORF: Your feelings about her have not changed since the day I met you, Commander. This place just let them out for a little fresh air.
[Ba'ku village - day]

SOJEF: I wish there were a way to bring them back home.
PICARD: Ask them.
SOJEF: I'm afraid there's too much bitterness on both sides.
(in the distance Crusher brings Gallatin to a 'young' Ba'ku woman)
ANIJ: Mother and son. ...You arranged this?
PICARD: I thought it might begin the healing process.
ANIJ: What am I going to do without you?
PICARD: I wish I could stay. ...But these are ...perilous times for the Federation. I can't abandon it to people who would threaten everything that I've spent my lifetime defending. I have to go back, if only to ...slow things down at the Federation Council. ...But I have three hundred and eighteen days of shore leave coming and ...I intend to use them.
[Ba'ku village hayfield]

(Data and Artim are each in a pile of hay)
CRUSHER: Data? It's time to go.
DATA: I have to go home now.
ARTIM: Bye.
DATA: Bye.
SOJEF: Mister Data, I hope we'll see you again.
ARTIM: Data! ...Don't forget. You have to have a little fun every day.
RIKER: Good advice.
(Data touches Riker on the chest and when he looks down, Data flips him on the nose)
PICARD: Picard to Enterprise. Seven to beam up. ...Energise.







[Picard's quarters]

(Picard is having a dream about his memories from end of "Best of Both Worlds, Part I.")
BORG QUEEN (OC): Locutus.
PICARD: I am Locutus of Borg. Resistance is futile.
(he is awakened by a comm bleep just as he is starting to be assimilated)
PICARD: Authorisation Picard four seven alpha tango. ...Admiral?
HAYES (on viewer): Did I catch you at a bad time Jean-Luc?
PICARD: No, of course not.
HAYES (on viewer): I've just received a disturbing report from Deep Space 5. Our colony on Ivor Prime was destroyed this morning. Long-range sensors have picked up...
PICARD: Yes, I know. ...The Borg.
Captains log, stardate 50893.5. The moment I have dreaded for nearly six years has finally arrived. The Borg, our most lethal enemy have begun an invasion of the Federation, and this time there may be no stopping them.
[Enterprise-E observation lounge]

RIKER: How many ships?
PICARD: One, and it's on a direct course for Earth. It'll cross the Federation border in less than an hour. Admiral Hayes is mobilising a fleet in the Typhon sector.
DATA: At maximum warp it will take us three hours twenty-five minutes.
PICARD: We're not going.
RIKER: What do you mean, 'We're not going'?
PICARD: Our orders are to patrol the Neutral Zone, in case the Romulans decide to take advantage of the situation.
TROI: The Romulans?
DATA: Captain, there has been no unusual activity along the Romulan border for nine months. It seems highly unlikely they would choose this moment to start a conflict.
CRUSHER: Does Starfleet feel we need more shakedown time?
LAFORGE: Captain, we've been out in space for nearly a year now. We're ready! The Enterprise-E is the most advanced starship in the fleet. We should be on the front line.
PICARD: I have gone over all this with Starfleet Command. Their orders stand. ...Number One, set a course for the Neutral Zone
[Picard's quarters]

(classical music is playing)
RIKER: Bizet?
PICARD: Berlioz. What do you have?
RIKER: We've finished our first sensor sweep of the Neutral Zone.
PICARD: Oh, fascinating. Twenty particles of space dust per cubic metre. Fifty-two ultra-violet radiation spikes and a class two comet. Well, this is certainly worthy of our attention.
RIKER: Captain, why are we out here chasing comets?
PICARD: Let's just say that Starfleet has every confidence in the Enterprise and her crew. They're just not sure about her Captain. They believe that a man who was once captured and assimilated by the Borg should not be put in a situation where he would face them again. To do so would introduce an unstable element to a critical situation
RIKER: That's ridiculous! Your experience of the Borg makes you the perfect man to lead this fight.
PICARD: Admiral Hayes disagrees.
TROI (on intercom): Bridge to Captain Picard.
PICARD: Go ahead.
TROI (on intercom): We've just received word from the fleet. They've engaged the Borg.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Data, put Starfleet frequency one four eight six on audio.
DATA: Aye sir.
FLEET COMMUNICATIONS: Flagship to Endeavor. Standby to engage at grid A-fifteen. ...Defiant and Bozeman, fall back to mobile position one. ...Acknowledge. ...We have it in visual range. A Borg cube on course zero point two one five, speed warp point nine six.
BORG COMMUNICATIONS: We are the Borg. Lower your shields and surrender your ships. We will add your biological and technological distinctiveness to our own. Your culture will adapt to service us. Resistance is futile.
FLEET COMMUNICATIONS: All units open fire. ...They've broken through the defence perimeter. ... Continue to attack. ...We need reinforcements. ...Ninety-six dead and twenty-two wounded on the Lexington.
PICARD: Lieutenant Hawk. Set a course for Earth.
HAWK: Aye sir.
PICARD: Maximum warp. ...I am about to commit a direct violation of our orders. Any of you who wish to object should do so now. It will be noted in my log.
DATA: Captain, I believe I speak for everyone here, sir, when I say ...to hell with our orders.
RIKER: RED ALERT! All hands to battle stations.
PICARD: Engage.
(the Borg cube, under attack, approaches Earth. The Defiant is one of the attacking ships)
[Defiant bridge]

WORF: Report!
CONN OFFICER: Main power is off-line. We've lost shields and our weapons have gone.
WORF: Perhaps today is a good day to die. Prepare for ramming speed!
CONN OFFICER: Sir, there's another starship coming in. ...It's the Enterprise!

[Enterprise-E bridge]

RIKER: The Defiant's losing life support.
PICARD: Bridge to transporter room three. Beam the Defiant survivors aboard.
RIKER: Captain, the Admiral's ship has been destroyed.
PICARD: What is the status of the Borg cube?
DATA: It has sustained heavy damage to its outer hull. I am reading fluctuations in their power grid.
PICARD: On screen. ...Number One, open a channel to the fleet.
RIKER: Channel open.
PICARD: This is Captain Picard of the Enterprise. I am taking command of the fleet. Target all of your weapons onto the following coordinates. ...Fire on my command.
DATA: Sir, the coordinates you have indicated do not appear to be a vital system.
PICARD: Trust me Data.
RIKER: The fleet's responded, sir. They're standing by.
PICARD: Fire.
(the fleet attacks and a circular aperture opens in the Borg ship and a Borg sphere launches before the ship explodes)
PICARD: Mister Hawk. Pursuit course. ...Engage.
HAWK: Aye sir.
TROI: What?
PICARD: I can hear them.
CRUSHER: I have a patient here who insists on coming to the bridge.
PICARD: Welcome aboard the Enterprise, Mister Worf.
WORF: Thank you sir. ...The Defiant?
PICARD: Adrift, but salvageable.
RIKER: Tough little ship.
WORF: Little?
PICARD: Mister Worf, we could use some help at tactical.
RIKER: You do remember how to fire phasers?
DATA: Sensors show chronometric particles emanating from the sphere.
PICARD: They're creating a temporal vortex.
RIKER: Time travel!
(the Enterprise suffers a shockwave)
PICARD: Data, report!
DATA: We appear to be caught in a temporal wake.
WORF: Captain, ...Earth.
DATA: The atmosphere contains high concentrations of methane, carbon monoxide and fluorine.
PICARD: Life signs?
DATA: Population ...approximately nine billion. ...All Borg!
TROI: How?
PICARD: They must have done it in the past. ...They went back and assimilated Earth. ...Changed history.
CRUSHER: Then if they changed history why are we still here?
DATA: The temporal wake must somehow have protected us from the changes in the time-line.
(Data's console bleeps)
DATA: Sir, the vortex is collapsing.
PICARD: Hold your course, Mister Hawk. We must follow them back. Repair whatever damage they've done.
[Montana settlement]

LILY: Come on.
COCHRANE: Good night Eddie. (to Lily) ...Go home.
LILY: You're gonna regret this tomorrow.
COCHRANE: Well, what I think you should have learned about me by now is that I don't have regrets. ...Come on, Lily, one more round.
LILY: Z, you've had enough. I'm not going up in that thing with a drunken pilot.
COCHRANE: But I sure as hell's not going up there sober.
LILY: What is that?
COCHRANE: That is the constellation Leo.
LILY: No, that.
(there is a bright orbiting light which suddenly fires two photon bolts towards the settlement)
LILY: It's the ECON.
COCHRANE: After all these years?
(more photon bolts)
LILY: We've got to get to the Phoenix!
(another photon bolt)
COCHRANE: To hell with the Phoenix.
(the attack continues and the Enterprise enters Earth orbit through the vortex)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Report.
RIKER: Shields are down. Long-range sensors are off-line. Main power's holding
DATA: According to our astrometric readings we're in the mid twenty-first century. From the radioactive isotopes in the atmosphere I would estimate we have arrived approximately ten years after the Third World War.
RIKER: Makes sense. Most of the major cities have been destroyed. There are few governments left. Six hundred million dead. No resistance.
WORF: Captain!
(the Borg sphere is firing at the surface)
PICARD: Mister Worf. Quantum torpedoes.
WORF: Ready, sir.
PICARD: Fire.
(the Borg sphere explodes)
PICARD: They were firing at the surface. Location?
RIKER: Western hemisphere, ...North American continent. At a missile complex in central Montana.
PICARD: A missile complex? ...The date? Mister Data, I need to know the exact date.
DATA: April fourth, two thousand sixty-three.
PICARD: April fourth?
RIKER: The day before First Contact.
DATA: Precisely.
CRUSHER (OC): Then the missile complex must be the one where Zefram Cochrane is building his warp ship.
PICARD: That's what they came here to do. Stop First Contact.
RIKER: How much damage, Lieutenant?
HAWK: I can't tell. Long-range sensors are still off-line.
PICARD: We'll have to go down there. Find out what happened. Data, Beverly, you're with me. Have a security team meet us in transporter room three. Computer. Mid-twenty-first century civilian clothing. ...Number One, you have the bridge.
[Montana settlement]

PICARD: Over here.
[Titan V silo]

CRUSHER: They're all dead.
PICARD: See if one of them is Cochrane. Data, let's go check the warp ship.
DATA: The structural integrity of the missile appears to be in tact. The fuselage is slightly damaged.
PICARD: We should have the original blueprints on the Enterprise computer. Commander La Forge will need to bring a team down here.
(Lily lets off a burst of rifle fire at them from below)
PICARD (OC): Hold your fire! We're here to help you!
LILY: Bullshit!
DATA: Captain, I believe I can handle this.
(Data jumps down to lower level taking Lily's fire)
DATA: Greetings!
(Lily faints)
DATA: Captain, this woman requires medical attention.
CRUSHER: Severe theta radiation poisoning.
DATA: Radiation is coming from the damaged throttle assembly.
CRUSHER: We're all gonna have to be inoculated, ...and I have to get her to sickbay.
PICARD: Doctor...
CRUSHER: Please, no lectures about the Prime Directive. I will keep her unconscious.
PICARD: Very well. Tell Commander Riker to beam down with a search party. We need to find Cochrane.
CRUSHER: Crusher to Enterprise. Two to beam directly to sickbay.
PICARD: We have less than forty-eight hours before this ship has to be launched. Picard to engineering.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: La Forge here.
[Titan V silo]

PICARD: Geordi, Cochrane's ship was damaged in the attack. Get down here with an engineering detail. We have work to do.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

LAFORGE: Right, I'm on my way, Captain. Alpha team. Let's assemble in transporter room three. We're heading down to the surface. ...Porter, you're gonna be in command 'til I get back. And, Porter, check out the environmental controls while I'm gone. It's getting a little warm in here. All right, let's go.
[Titan V silo]

PICARD: Isn't it amazing? This ship used to be a nuclear missile.
DATA: It is an historical irony that Doctor Cochrane would use an instrument of mass-destruction to inaugurate an era of peace.
(Picard feels the Titan V rocket)
PICARD: It's a boyhood fantasy, Data. I must have seen this ship hundreds of times in the Smithsonian, but I was never able to touch it.
DATA: Sir, does tactile contact alter your perception of the Phoenix?
PICARD: Oh, yes. For humans, touch can connect you to an object in a very personal way. It makes it seem more real.
DATA: I am detecting imperfections in the titanium casing. Temperature variations in the fuel manifold. It's no more real to me now than it was a moment ago.
TROI: Would you three like to be alone?
PICARD: What have you found out?
TROI: There's no sign of Cochrane anywhere in the complex.
PICARD: He has to be here. There was nothing more important to him than this ship. This flight. It was his dream.
TROI: Captain, we should consider the possibility that Doctor Cochrane was killed in the attack.
PICARD: Huh. If that's true then the future may die with him.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

EIGER: What do you think?
PORTER: That the entire environmental system's gone crazy. It's not just engineering, it's the entire deck. Maybe it's a problem with the EPS conduits.
[Enterprise-E Jefferies tube]

PORTER: Hello? ...Hey!
EIGER (OC): Are you talking to me?
PORTER: Is there any one else working maintenance in this section?
EIGER (OC): Not that I know of.
PORTER (OC): Aarrgh!
[Enterprise-E engineering]

EIGER: Paul? ...Paul, are you okay in there?
[Enterprise-E Jefferies tube]

EIGER: Aarrgh!
[Titan V silo]

TROI: Captain, what is it?
PICARD: Picard to Enterprise. Mister Worf, is everything all right up there?
WORF (on intercom): Yes sir. We are experiencing some environmental difficulties on deck sixteen but that is all.
PICARD: What kind of difficulties?
WORF (on intercom): Humidity levels have risen seventy-three percent and the temperature has jumped ten degrees in the last hour.
PICARD: Mister Data and I are returning to the ship.
WORF (on intercom): Understood.
PICARD: Number One, take charge down here.
RIKER: Aye sir.
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

CRUSHER: The damage to her cell membranes is repaired. She should be fine but I'd like to run another test on the spinal tissue. Would you find out why it's so hot in here?
(the lighting and other systems glitch)
CRUSHER: Now what? Crusher to engineering. ...Crusher to bridge.
(there is a huge thud behind her)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Commander Worf. I need to know exactly what's been happening.
WORF: We have lost contact with deck sixteen. Communications, internal sensors, everything. I was about to send a security team to investigate.
PICARD: No! Seal off deck sixteen. Post security teams at every access point.
WORF: Aye sir.
PICARD: Mister Hawk, before we lost internal sensors what were the exact environmental conditions in main engineering?
HAWK: Atmospheric pressure was two kilopascals above normal, ninety-two percent humidity, thirty-nine point one degrees Celsius.
PICARD: Thirty-nine point one degrees Celsius. ...Like a Borg ship. They knew their ship was doomed, our shields were down and somehow they transported over here without being detected. They'll assimilate the Enterprise, and then ...Earth. ...Picard to Riker. ...Enterprise to away team. ...Respond.
HAWK: Sir, the main control is being rerouted through main engineering. ...Weapons, shields, propulsion.
PICARD: Quickly, Mister Data. Lock out the main computer.
DATA: I have isolated the main computer with a fractal encryption code. It is highly unlikely the Borg will be able to break it.
WORF: The Borg have cut power to all decks except sixteen.
PICARD: The Borg won't stay on deck sixteen.
[Enterprise-E sickbay]

CRUSHER: Wake up, you're all right. Come on, come on, wake up.
(Lily comes to, panicking)
CRUSHER: Hold steady. Stay calm. You are all right. Now listen to me. You're going to be fine, listen to me. I just need you to do as I say. ...Alyssa, is the EMH programme still on line?
OGAWA: It should be, sir.
(there is more thudding)
CRUSHER: Computer. Activate the EMH programme.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL HOLOGRAM: Please state the nature of the medical emergency.
CRUSHER: Twenty Borg are about to break through that door. We need time to get out of here. Create a diversion.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL HOLOGRAM: This isn't part of my programme. I'm a doctor, not a doorstop.
CRUSHER: Well do a dance. Tell a story. I don't care. Just give us a few seconds.
(Crusher, Ogawa and Lily and the rest of the medical staff escape through a hatchway)
EMERGENCY MEDICAL HOLOGRAM: According to Starfleet medical research, Borg implants can cause severe skin irritations. Perhaps you'd like an analgesic cream.

[Enterprise-E Jefferies tube]

OGAWA: Which way?
CRUSHER: We need to get off this deck. Follow me.
(Lily heads off in another direction)
[Enterprise-E armoury]

PICARD: The first thing they'll do in engineering is establish a collective, a central point from which they can control the hive. The problem is if we begin firing particle weapons in engineering there's a risk we may hit the warp core. I believe our goal should be to puncture one of the plasma coolant tanks. Data?
DATA: Excellent idea. Plasma coolant will liquefy organic material on contact.
WORF: But the Borg are not entirely organic.
PICARD: True, but like all cybernetic lifeforms they cannot survive without their organic components.
WORF: I have ordered all weapons to be set on a rotating modulation. The Borg will adapt quickly. We will be able to fire twelve shots at most.
PICARD: One other thing. ...You may encounter Enterprise crewmembers who've already been assimilated. Don't hesitate to fire. Believe me you'll be doing them a favour. ...Let's go.
[Montana settlement bar]

(rock and roll music is blaring out of a jukebox)
RIKER: Deanna! ...Deanna! Deanna!
(Riker rips out the power lead silencing the music)
TROI: No! No, don't turn it off that...
COCHRANE: Who is this jerk? ...And who told him he could turn off my music?
TROI: Will Riker. ...Zefram Cochrane.
COCHRANE: Is he a friend of yours?
TROI: Yes.
COCHRANE: Husband?
TROI: No.
COCHRANE: Good! ...Now this, Deena...
TROI: Deanna.
COCHRANE: This ...is the good stuff.
RIKER: Doctor Cochrane...
COCHRANE: To the Phoenix. ...May she rest in peace.
(Cochrane and Troi knock back their slugs with some reaction)
COCHRANE: Okay, that wasn't so good.
TROI: Will, I think we have to tell him the truth.
RIKER: If we tell the truth the timeline...
TROI: Timeline! This is no time to argue about time. We don't have the time! ...What was I saying?
RIKER: You're drunk.
TROI: I am not.
RIKER: You are.
TROI: Look. He wouldn't even talk to me unless I had a drink with him. And then it took three shots of something called tequila just to find out he was the one we're looking for. And I've spent the last twenty minutes trying to keep his hands off me. So don't go criticising my counselling techniques. ...It's a primitive culture. I'm just trying to blend in.
RIKER: You're blending all right.
TROI: I've already told him our cover story. He didn't believe me.
RIKER: Yes. We're running out of time. Now if we tell him the truth do you think he'll be able to handle it?
TROI: If you're looking for my professional opinion as ship's Counselor, ...he's nuts.
RIKER: I'll be sure to note that in my log.
(the jukebox springs back into life, Troi passes out and Cochrane gyrates to the music)
[Enterprise-E corridors]

(security parties led by Picard and Worf discover Borg cubicles)
DATA: Captain, I believe I am feeling ...anxiety. It's an intriguing sensation. A most distracting...
PICARD: Data, I'm sure it's a fascinating experience. Perhaps you should deactivate your emotion chip for now.
DATA: Good idea, sir. ...Done.
PICARD: Data, there are times when I envy you.
(Worf's party is startled by a hatch opening)
CRUSHER: It's only me!
WORF: Are you all right?
CRUSHER: Yes but we have wounded here.
WORF: Lopez, get these people back to deck fourteen.
CRUSHER: There was a civilian. A woman from the twenty-first century. We got separated.
WORF: We'll watch for her.
CRUSHER: Worf, she has no idea what's going on. Try to find her.
(Picard's party discover Borg drones and assimilated crewmembers)
PICARD: Lower your weapons. They'll ignore us 'til they consider us a threat.
(the two parties meet up outside main engineering)
PICARD: The manual release? ...Mister Worf, hold this position.
COMPUTER VOICE: Manual release is on-line.
PICARD: Perhaps we should just knock?
(Borg drones begin to stir)
PICARD: Data.
WORF: Ready phasers!
(a firefight develops)
PICARD: Data, cover me.
WORF: Captain, they have adapted!
(Picard succeeds in opening main engineering)
PICARD: Regroup on deck fifteen. Don't let them touch you!
DATA: Captain!
PICARD: Data!
(Data is dragged under the closing door into engineering. The Borg continue spreading out, assimilating crewmembers as they find them)
PICARD: Here!
(Picard finds a hatch sending a crewmember down through it)
LYNCH: Captain! ...Help. ...Please, help.
(Picard shoots the assimilated officer. Having followed the crewmember through the hatch Picard is attacked from behind by Lily who grabs his phaser)
[Enterprise-E observation lounge]

PICARD: You! How the hell did you?...
LILY: Back off!
PICARD: Calm down!
LILY: Down! Who are you?
PICARD: My name is Jean-Luc Picard...
LILY: Down! Who are you with? What faction?
PICARD: I'm not a member of the Eastern Coalition. Listen.
LILY: I said, shut up! I don't care who you're with. Just get me to hell out of here. ...Now!
PICARD: That isn't going to be easy.
LILY: Well, you'd better find a way to make it easy, soldier, or I'm going to start pushing buttons.
PICARD: All right! ...Follow me.
LILY: Slow!
(they crawl into a Jefferies tube)
[Enterprise-E engineering]

(Data is on a Borg bio-bed with Borg working at a console)
DATA: Your efforts to break the encryption code will not be successful. Nor will your attempt to assimilate me into your collective.
BORG QUEEN (OC): Brave words. I've heard them before from thousands of species across thousands of worlds ...since long before you were created. But now they are all Borg.
DATA: I am unlike any lifeform you have encountered before. The code stored in my neural net cannot be forcibly removed.
BORG QUEEN (OC): You are an imperfect being created by an imperfect being. Finding your weaknesses is only a matter of time.
(two drills begin to bore into Data's head)
[Montana settlement bar]

COCHRANE: Let me make sure that I understand you correctly, ...Commander. A group of cybernetic creatures from the future have travelled back through time to enslave the human race, and you're here to stop them.
RIKER: That's right.
COCHRANE: Hot damn, you're heroic. Ha, ha, ha.
RIKER: We're gonna prove it to you. Geordi!
[Montana settlement]

LAFORGE: There she is. She's beautiful. ...All right. Take a look.
COCHRANE: Well, well, well. What have we got here? ...I love a good peep show.
(Cochrane looks through a telescope and sees the Enterprise orbiting)
COCHRANE: Ha, ha, ha. That's a trick. Ha, ha, ha. How'd you do that?
LAFORGE: It's your telescope.
TROI: That's our ship. The Enterprise.
COCHRANE: And Lily's up there right now?
TROI (OC): That's right.
COCHRANE: Can I talk to her?
RIKER: We've lost contact with the Enterprise. We don't know why yet.
COCHRANE: So, what is it you want me to do?
RIKER: Simple. Conduct your warp flight tomorrow morning just as you planned.
COCHRANE: Why tomorrow morning?
RIKER: Because at eleven o'clock an alien ship will begin passing through this solar system.
COCHRANE: Alien? You mean extra-terrestrials. More bad guys?
TROI: Good guys. They're on a survey mission. They have no interest in Earth. ...Too primitive.
COCHRANE: Oh!
RIKER: Doctor, tomorrow morning when they detect the warp signature from your ship and realise that humans have discovered how to travel faster than light, they decide to alter their course and make first contact with Earth, right here.
COCHRANE: Here?
LAFORGE: Sir, it's actually over there.
RIKER: It is one of the pivotal moments in human history, Doctor. You get to make first contact with an alien race, and after you do, everything begins to change.
LAFORGE: Your theories on warp drive allow fleets of starships to be built and mankind to start exploring the Galaxy.
TROI: It unites humanity in a way no one ever thought possible when they realise they're not alone in the universe. Poverty, disease, war. They'll all be gone within the next fifty years.
RIKER: But unless you make that warp flight tomorrow morning before eleven fifteen, none of it will happen.
COCHRANE: And you people, you're all astronauts, ... on some kind of star trek?
LAFORGE: Look, Doc, I know this is a lot for you to take in, but we're running out of time here.
RIKER: We need your help. ...What do you say?
COCHRANE: Why not?
(the fight against assimilation continues in the Enterprise corridors)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: It's pretty bad, sir. It looks like they control decks twenty-six up to eleven. But when they took deck eleven they just stopped.
WORF: The Borg have assimilated more than half the ship in a matter of hours. Why stop there? What is on deck eleven?
HAWK: Hydroponics, Stellar Cartography, Deflector Control. All vital systems.
WORF: They would not have stopped there unless it gave them a tactical advantage. Return to your checkpoints. Send reports every ten minutes
DANIELS: Right, sir, 
[Enterprise-E Jefferies tube]

PICARD: Something must have happened in sickbay. Where is Doctor Crusher and the others?
LILY: Why did you break the cease-fire?
PICARD: We didn't attack you.
LILY: Who did?
[Enterprise-E umbilical docking port]

PICARD: There's a... There's a new faction that wants to prevent your launch tomorrow morning. But we're here to help you. This may be difficult for you to accept, but you are not in Montana anymore. You are on a ship, ...a spaceship, orbiting the Earth at an altitude of...
LILY: If you want to help me, get me out of here.
PICARD: All right. ...You want a way out. Here it is.
(Picard opens a panel in the hull revealing a view of Earth)
LILY: What is this?
PICARD: Australia, New Guinea, The Solomons. Montana will be up soon but you may want to hold your breath. It's a long way down. ...Now listen to me. I'm not your enemy and I can get you home. First you must put that weapon down and trust me. ...Jean-Luc Picard, my name. That's my name. What's yours?
LILY: Lily.
PICARD: Welcome aboard, Lily.
(she gives him the phaser)
PICARD: Thank you. ...Maximum setting. If you'd fired this you would have vaporised me.
LILY: It's my first ray gun.
(Picard leads her to the opening in the hull)
LILY: There's no glass.
(Picard touches the opening causing a flash which startles Lily)
PICARD: Forcefield.
LILY: I've never seen this kind of technology.
PICARD: That's because it hasn't been invented yet.
LILY: What?
PICARD: There's more I have to tell you. Come on.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

BORG QUEEN (OC): Are you ready?
DATA: Who are you?
BORG QUEEN (OC): I am the Borg.
DATA: That is a contradiction. The Borg have a collective consciousness. There are no individuals.
(the Borg Queen's head and shoulders descend from the ceiling)
BORG QUEEN: I am the beginning, the end, the one who is many.
(the head and shoulders lock into a cybernetic body and the Queen approaches Data)
BORG QUEEN: I am the Borg.
DATA: Greetings. ...I am curious, do you control the Borg collective?
BORG QUEEN: You imply disparity where none exists. I am the collective.
DATA: Perhaps I should rephrase the question. I wish to understand the organisational relationship. Are you their leader?
BORG QUEEN: I bring order to chaos.
DATA: An interesting, if cryptic response.
BORG QUEEN: You are in chaos, Data. You are the contradiction. A machine who wishes to be human.
DATA: As you seem to know so much about me, you must be aware that I am programmed to evolve and better myself.
BORG QUEEN: We too are on a quest to better ourselves. Evolving toward a state of perfection.
DATA: Forgive me. The Borg do not evolve. They conquer.
BORG QUEEN: By assimilating other beings into our collective, we are bringing them closer to perfection.
DATA: Somehow I question your motives.
BORG QUEEN: That is because you haven't been properly ...stimulated yet.
DATA: Heh, heh, heh. You have reactivated my emotion chip. ...Why?
BORG QUEEN: Don't be frightened.
DATA: I am not frightened.
BORG QUEEN: Do you know what this is, Data?
DATA: It would appear you are attempting to graft organic skin onto my endoskeletal structure.
BORG QUEEN: What a cold description for such a beautiful gift.
(the Borg Queen strokes the section of skin)
DATA: Heh, heh, heh.
BORG QUEEN: Was that good for you?
[Enterprise-E corridors]

LILY: How many planets are in this Federation?
PICARD: Over one hundred and fifty ...spread across eight thousand light years.
LILY: You mustn't get home much.
PICARD: Actually, I tend to think of this ship as home. But if it's Earth you're talking about I try to get back whenever I can. ...Good they haven't broken the encryption code yet.
LILY: Who? Those bionic zombies you told me about.
PICARD: The Borg.
LILY: Borg? It sounds Swedish. ...How big is this ship?
PICARD: There are twenty-four decks. Almost seven hundred metres long.
LILY: It took me six months to scrounge up enough titanium just to build a four-metre cockpit. ...How much did this thing cost?
PICARD: The economics of the future are somewhat different. ...You see, money doesn't exist in the twenty-fourth century.
LILY: No money! That means you don't get paid.
PICARD: The acquisition of wealth is no longer the driving force in our lives. ...We work to better ourselves ...and the rest of humanity. Actually we're rather like yourself and Doctor Cochrane.
(as they turn a corner Lily screams having seen some Borg)
PICARD: All right! ...Come on.
LILY: Is there another way around?
PICARD: I know what I'm doing.
LILY: Definitely not Swedish.
(they negotiate the Borgified section and then Picard turns and fires his phaser at the Borg)
LILY: What the hell are you doing?
(they are pursued through a door to a holodeck entrance. Picard calls up the programme 'The Big Goodbye', Chapter 12)
PICARD: Perhaps something in satin?
[Enterprise-E holodeck]

(they enter a nineteen-thirties night club pursued by two Borg)
MAITRE D': I'm sorry, gentlemen but we're closing, and you do understand we have a strict dress code? So if you boys don't leave right now I'll...
(the Borg discover the Maitre d' is a hologram)
PICARD: I'm looking for Nicky the Nose.
BARTENDER: He hasn't been here in months.
PICARD: This is the wrong chapter.
(just then the Maitre d' flies through the air)
PICARD: Computer! Begin Chapter thirteen.
(music starts as the scene changes. Picard takes Lily onto the dance floor)
PICARD: Try and look as if you're having a good time.
SINGER: (singing 'Moonlight Becomes You')
PICARD: No, no, no, look at me. Try to act naturally. ...There he is.
(a blonde comes up, takes hold of Picard/Dixon Hill and kisses him)
PICARD: Ruby! This is not a good time.
RUBY: It's never the time for us, is it, Dix? Always a good excuse. (about Lily) Is this the case you're working on?
PICARD: I have to talk to Nicky. I'll see you later.
RUBY: Okay, but watch your caboose and dump the broad.
NICKY THE NOSE: Well, well, well, look what the cat dragged in. What's shakin', Dix?
PICARD: The usual, Nick. Martinis and skirts. ...Excuse me.
(Picard picks up Nicky's henchman and fleeces him. As the two Borg approach a waiter gets pushed to the floor)
HENCHMAN: Hey! I'm gonna take that personal.
PICARD: No offence.
(Picard grabs the henchman's violin case)
HENCHMAN: Hey!
(Lily smashes the henchman over the head with an ice bucket. Picard takes a tommy gun out of the case and blasts the two Borg, then raises the gun to smash down on one)
LILY: I think you got 'em. ...I don't get it. I thought you said this was all just a bunch of holograms. If it was just a hologram...
PICARD: I disengaged the safety protocols. Without them even a holographic bullet can kill.
LILY: What are you doing?
PICARD: I'm looking for the neural processor. Every Borg has one. It's like a memory chip. It will contain a record of all the instructions this Borg has been receiving from the collective.
LILY: Oh my! Jean-Luc, it's one of your uniforms.
PICARD: Yes, this was Ensign Lynch.
LILY: Tough luck, huh.
PICARD: I've got to get to the bridge.
[Montana settlement]

LAFORGE (OC): Doctor!
COCHRANE: Yeah.
LAFORGE: Would you mind taking a look at this?
COCHRANE: Yeah.
LAFORGE: I've tried to reconstruct the intermix chamber from what I remember at school. Tell me if I got it right.
COCHRANE: School? You learned about this in school?
LAFORGE: Oh yeah. 'Basic Warp Design' is a required course at the Academy. The first chapter is called 'Zefram Cochrane'.
COCHRANE: Well, it looks like you got it right.
BARCLAY: Commander. This is what we're thinking of using to replace the damaged warp plasma conduit.
(Geordi uses his ocular implant to examine a spiral of copper tubing)
LAFORGE: Yeah. Yeah, that's good, but you need to reinforce this copper tubing with a nano-polymer.
BARCLAY: Doctor Cochrane. I know this sounds silly, but can I shake your hand? ...Thank you, Doctor. I can't tell you what an honour it is to work with you on this project.
LAFORGE: Reg!
BARCLAY: I never imagined I'd be meeting the man who invented the warp drive.
LAFORGE: Reg!
BARCLAY: I'm sorry. Right. ...Thanks.
COCHRANE: Do they have to keep doing this?
LAFORGE: It's just a little hero worship, Doctor. To tell you the truth I can't say I blame them. We all grew up hearing about what you did. Or what you're about to do. You know I probably shouldn't be telling you this but I went to Zefram Cochrane High School.
COCHRANE: Really?
LAFORGE: You know? I wish I had a picture of this.
COCHRANE: What?
LAFORGE: Oh well, you see, in the future this whole area becomes an historical monument. You're standing almost on the exact spot where your statue's gonna be.
COCHRANE: Statue?
LAFORGE: Yeah! It's marble, about twenty metres tall and you're looking up at the sky. Your hand sort of reaching to the future.
COCHRANE: I gotta to take a leak!
LAFORGE: Leak? I'm not detecting any leak.
COCHRANE: Don't you people from the twenty-fourth century ever pee?
LAFORGE: Oh, leak, I get it. ...That's pretty funny.
COCHRANE: Excuse me.
CREWWOMAN: Commander?
(a female engineer shows Geordi a padd)
[Enterprise-E bridge]

(Picard opens a hatch into the bridge to be confronted by Worf, Crusher and Hawk pointing phaser rifles)
WORF: Captain.
CRUSHER: Jean-Luc.
PICARD: Reports of my assimilation are greatly exaggerated. I found something you lost.
(Lily gasps when confronted by Worf)
WORF: I am a Klingon.
PICARD (OC): Mister Worf, report.
WORF: The Borg control over half the ship. We have tried to restore power to the bridge and the weapons systems but we have been unsuccessful.
PICARD: We have another problem. I've accessed a Borg neural processor and I've discovered what they are trying to do. They're transforming the deflector dish into an interplexing beacon.
HAWK: Interplexing?
PICARD: It's a subspace transmitter. If they activate the beacon they'll be able to establish a link with the Borg living in this century.
CRUSHER: But in the twenty-first century the Borg are still in the Delta Quadrant.
PICARD: They'll send reinforcements. Humanity will be an easy target. Attack the Earth in the past ...to assimilate the future.
WORF: Then we must destroy the deflector dish before they can activate the beacon.
PICARD: We can't get to deflector control or the shuttlecraft. ...Mister Worf, do you remember your zero-G combat training?
WORF: I remember it made me sick in my stomach. ...What are you suggesting?
PICARD: I think it's time that we took a little stroll.
[Montana woods]

LAFORGE: Hang on. There's a humanoid life sign up ahead. Five hundred eleven metres.
(Geordi uses his ocular implants)
RIKER: Cochrane?
LAFORGE: It's him all right.
[Enterprise-E airlock control]

(Picard, Worf and Hawk in environmental suits)
WORF: I've remodulated the pulse emitters but I do not believe we will get more than one or two shots before the Borg adapt.
PICARD: Then we must make every shot count. ...Magnetise.
LILY: Watch your caboose, Dix.
PICARD: I intend to.
[Enterprise-E underside]

PICARD: How are you doing, Mister Worf?
WORF: Not well, sir.
PICARD: Try not to look at the stars. Keep your eyes on the hull. ...Let's go.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

DATA: Tell me. Are you using a polymer-based neuro-relay to transmit the organic nerve impulses to the central processor in my positronic net? If that is the case, how have you solved the problem of increased signal degradation inherent to organosynthetic transmission across...
BORG QUEEN (OC): Do you always talk this much?
DATA: Not always, ...but often.
BORG QUEEN: Why do you insist on utilising this primitive linguistic communication? Your android brain is capable of so much more.
DATA: Have you forgotten? I am endeavouring to become more human.
BORG QUEEN: Human! We used to be exactly like them. Flawed, weak, organic, but we evolved to include the synthetic. Now we use both to attain perfection. Your goal should be the same as ours.
DATA: Believing oneself to be perfect is often the sign of a delusional mind.
BORG QUEEN: Small words, from a small being, trying to attack what he doesn't understand.
DATA: I understand that you have no real interest in me. That your goal is to obtain the encryption codes for the Enterprise computer.
BORG QUEEN: That is one of our goals, one of many. But in order to reach it I am willing to help you reach yours.
(Data breaks an arm free and thumps a Borg drone, releases himself, fights with drones before being restrained, his arm wounded)
BORG QUEEN: Is it becoming clear to you yet? Look at yourself, standing there cradling the new flesh that I've given you. If it means nothing to you, why protect it?
DATA: I ...I am simply imitating the behaviour of humans.
BORG QUEEN: You're becoming more human all the time. Now you're learning how to lie.
DATA: My programming was not designed to process these sensations.
BORG QUEEN: Then tear the skin from your limbs as you would a defective circuit. ...Go ahead, Data. We won't stop you. ...Do it. Don't be tempted by flesh. ...Are you familiar with physical forms of pleasure?
DATA: If ...you are ...referring to ...sexuality, ...I am fully functional. Programmed in ...multiple techniques.
BORG QUEEN: How long has it been since you've used them?
DATA: Eight years, seven months, sixteen days, one minutes, twenty-two...
BORG QUEEN: Far too long.
(the Borg Queen kisses him and he returns the kiss)
[Enterprise-E underside]

WORF: We should bring reinforcements.
PICARD: There's no time. It looks as if they're building the beacon right on top of the particle emitter. Once all the transponder rods are in place the beacon will be activated.
HAWK: Well if we set our phasers to full power...
PICARD: No! There's a risk that we hit the dish. It's charged with anti-protons. We could destroy half the ship. We have to find another way.
[Montana woods]

(Cochrane, running away pursued by Riker and Geordi, is confronted by four guards)
GUARD #1: Doctor!
GUARD #2: Sir.
LAFORGE: Still looking for the bathroom?
COCHRANE: I'm not going back.
LAFORGE: Look, Doc, we can't do this without you.
COCHRANE: I don't care. I don't want to be a statue.
RIKER: Doctor!
COCHRANE: You stay away from me.
RIKER: We don't have time for this.
(as Cochrane runs away Riker stuns him with his phaser)
RIKER: You told him about the statue?
[Enterprise-E deflector dish]

(the three Starfleet officers spread out around the dish)
PICARD: For this to work all three maglocks will have to be released.
(they open the maglocks, Picard red, Hawk green, Worf blue, getting 'ACCESS DENIED'. Hawk blasts away a Borg drone. Worf manually releases his maglock)
WORF: Magnetic restrictors are disengaged. ...They've adapted.
(Picard sends a drone into space by blasting at the dish under the its feet. Worf tangles with a drone using his mek'leth but his suit is punctured)
COMPUTER VOICE: Warning. Decompression in forty-five seconds.
PICARD: Hawk!
(Hawk is captured by a drone just before he's able to release the maglock. Picard releases his maglock and somersaults over a pursuing drone to Hawk's maglock and releases it. The restraining catches open and the interplexing beacon floats free. A Borgified Hawk attacks Picard but is kicked into space by Worf who has used a Borg cable as a tourniquet on his suit. Picard blasts through the connection to the beacon fully releasing it)
[Enterprise-E engineering]

BORG QUEEN: We've had a change of plans, Data.
[Enterprise-E deflector dish]

WORF: Assimilate this!
(Worf destroys the interplexing beacon with his phaser rifle)
[Phoenix cockpit]

RIKER: Only got an hour to go, Doc. How are you feeling?
COCHRANE: I've got a four-alarm hangover either from the whiskey or your laser beam, ...or both, ...but I'm ready to make history! Ha, ha, ha.
TROI (on intercom): Troi to Commander Riker.
RIKER: Riker here.
[Titan V control room]

TROI: We're ready to open the launch door.
RIKER (on intercom): Go ahead.
[Phoenix cockpit]

RIKER: Look at that!
COCHRANE: What, you don't have a moon in the twenty-fourth century?
RIKER: Sure we do. It looks a lot different. There are fifty million people living on the moon in my time. You can see Tycho City, New Berlin, even Lake Armstrong on a day like this.
COCHRANE: Aha.
RIKER: And you know, Doctor...
COCHRANE: Please ...don't tell me it's all thanks to me. I've heard enough about the great Zefram Cochrane. I don't know who writes your history books or where you get your information from, but you people got some pretty funny ideas about me. You all look at me as if I'm some kind of saint or visionary or something.
RIKER: I don't think you're a saint, Doc, but you did have a vision. ...And now we're sitting in it.
COCHRANE: You wanna know what my vision is? ...Dollar signs! Money! I didn't build this ship to usher in a new era for humanity. You think I wanna go to the stars? I don't even like to fly. I take trains. I built this ship so that I could retire to some tropical island filled with ...naked women. That's Zefram Cochrane. That's his vision. This other guy you keep talking about. This historical figure. I never met him. I can't imagine I ever will.
RIKER: Someone once said 'Don't try to be a great man. Just be a man, and let history make it's own judgements'.
COCHRANE: Rhetorical nonsense. Who said that?
RIKER: You did, ten years from now. ...You've got fifty-eight minutes, Doc. You better get on with the checklist.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

DANIELS: They're on the move again. The Borg just overrun three of our defence checkpoints. They've taken over decks five and six. They've adapted to every modulation on our weapons. It's like we're shooting blanks.
PICARD: We'll have to work on finding another way to modify our weapons so they'll be more effective. In the meantime, tell your men to stand their ground.
SECURITY OFFICER #2: Sir?
PICARD: Fight hand-to-hand If they have to.
SECURITY OFFICER #2: Aye sir.
WORF: Wait! Captain, our weapons are useless. We must activate the autodestruct sequence and use the escape pods to evacuate the ship.
PICARD: No!
CRUSHER: Jean-Luc, if we destroy the ship we destroy the Borg.
PICARD: We're going to stay and fight.
WORF: Sir, we have lost the Enterprise. We should not sacrifice...
PICARD: We have not lost the Enterprise, Mister Worf. We are not going to lose the Enterprise. Not to the Borg. Not while I'm in command. You have your orders.
WORF: I must object to this course of action.
PICARD: Your objection is noted.
WORF: With all due respect, sir, ...I believe you are allowing your personal experience with the Borg to influence your judgement.
PICARD: You're afraid. You want to destroy the ship and run away. You coward.
CRUSHER (OC): Jean-Luc...
WORF: If you were any other man I would kill you where you stand.
PICARD: Get off my bridge.
LILY: So what do we do now?
CRUSHER: Carry out his orders. Dyson. Kaplan. Start working on a way to modify the weapons systems.
LILY: Wait a minute! This is stupid. If we can get off this ship and blow it up, let's do it.
CRUSHER: Once the Captain has made up his mind the discussion is over.
(Lily goes after Picard)
CRUSHER: Lily!...
[Enterprise-E observation lounge]

LILY: You son of a bitch.
PICARD: This really isn't the time.
LILY: Okay. I don't know jack about the twenty-fourth century but everybody out there thinks that staying here and fighting the Borg is suicide. They're just afraid to come in here and say it.
PICARD: The crew is accustomed to following my orders.
LILY: They're probably accustomed to your orders making sense.
PICARD: None of them understand the Borg as I do. ...No one does. No one can.
LILY: What is that supposed to mean?
PICARD: Six years ago, they assimilated me into their collective. I had their cybernetic devices implanted throughout my body. I was linked to the hive mind, every trace of individuality erased. I was one of them. So you can imagine, my dear, I have a somewhat unique perspective on the Borg and I know how to fight them. Now if you will excuse me I have work to do.
LILY: I am such an idiot. ...It's so simple. The Borg hurt you, and now you're going to hurt them back.
PICARD: In my century we don't succumb to revenge. We have a more evolved sensibility.
LILY: Bullshit! I saw the look on your face when you shot those Borg on the holodeck. You were almost enjoying it!
PICARD: How dare you!
LILY: Oh, come on, Captain. You're not the first man to get a thrill from murdering someone. I see it all the time.
PICARD: Get out!
LILY: Or what? You'll kill me, like you killed Ensign Lynch
PICARD: There was no way to save him.
LILY: You didn't even try. Where was your evolved sensibility then?
PICARD: I don't have time for this.
LILY: Oh! Hey! I'm sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt your little quest. Captain Ahab has to go hunt his whale.
PICARD: What?
LILY: You do have books in the twenty-fourth century?
PICARD: This is not about revenge.
LILY: Liar!
PICARD: This is about saving the future of humanity.
LILY: Jean-Luc, blow up the damn ship!
PICARD: No! ...No!
(Picard breaks the starship display cabinet with his phaser rifle)
PICARD: No! ...I will not sacrifice the Enterprise. We've made too many compromises already. Too many retreats. They invade our space and we fall back. They assimilate entire worlds, and we fall back. Not again! The line must be drawn here, ...this far, no further! And I will make them pay for what they've done.
LILY: You broke your little ships. ...See you around, Ahab.
PICARD: 'And he piled upon the whale's white hump, a sum of all the rage and hate felt by his own race. If his chest had been a cannon, he would have shot his heart upon it.'
LILY: What?
PICARD: 'Moby Dick.'
LILY: Actually, I never read it.
PICARD: Ahab spent years hunting the white whale that crippled him. A quest for vengeance, ...but in the end it destroyed him and his ship.
LILY: I guess he didn't know when to quit.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Prepare to evacuate the Enterprise.

[Phoenix cockpit]

COCHRANE: ATR settings.
LAFORGE: Active.
COCHRANE: Main bus.
RIKER: Ready.
COCHRANE: Initiate pre-ignition sequence.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Begin autodestruct sequence, authorisation Picard, four seven alpha tango.
CRUSHER: Computer. Commander Beverly Crusher, confirm autodestruct sequence authorisation Crusher, two two beta charlie.
WORF: Computer. Lieutenant Commander Worf, confirm autodestruct sequence authorisation, Worf three seven gamma echo.
COMPUTER VOICE: Command authorisation accepted. Awaiting final code to begin autodestruct sequence.
PICARD: This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard, destruct sequence alpha one. Fifteen minutes silent countdown. ...Enable.
COMPUTER VOICE: Self-destruct in fifteen minutes. There will be no further audio warning.
CRUSHER: So much for the Enterprise-E.
PICARD: We barely knew her.
CRUSHER: Think they'll build another one?
PICARD: Plenty of letters left in the alphabet. ...Mister Worf. I regret some of the things I said to you earlier.
WORF: Some?
PICARD: As a matter of fact I think you're the bravest man I have ever known.
WORF: Thank you, sir.
PICARD: See you on Gravett Island.
DATA (telepathically with sounds of the collective): Captain.
PICARD: Data.
[Titan V control room]

TROI: Control to Phoenix. The final launch sequence checks are complete. Good luck.
[Phoenix cockpit]

RIKER: Everybody ready to make some history?
LAFORGE: Always am.
COCHRANE: I think I forgot something.
RIKER: What?
COCHRANE: I don't know. It's probably nothing.
[Titan V control room]

TROI: Begin ignition sequence.

[Phoenix cockpit]

TROI (OC): Twenty...
COCHRANE: Oh, God!
TROI (OC): Nineteen...
COCHRANE: Now I remember.
TROI (OC): Eighteen...
LAFORGE: What?
TROI (OC): Seventeen...
COCHRANE: Where is it?
LAFORGE: What?
TROI (OC): Sixteen...
COCHRANE: We can't lift off without it.
TROI (OC): Fifteen...
RIKER: Geordi, we've gotta abort!
TROI (OC): Fourteen...
COCHRANE: No, no wait I've found it!
TROI (OC): Thirteen, twelve, eleven, ten...
(Cochrane stuffs a cassette into a player)
[Titan V control room]

TROI: Nine, eight...
[Phoenix cockpit]

TROI (OC): Seven...
COCHRANE: Let's rock 'n' roll!
TROI (OC): Six...
('Magic Carpet Ride' booms out of the speakers as the Titan V blasts off)
RIKER: Can you turn that down a little?
LAFORGE: Hey! We've got a red light on the second intake valve.
COCHRANE: Ignore it. We'll be fine. ...Prepare for first stage shutdown and separation on my mark. Three, two, one, mark.
RIKER: Okay, let's bring the warp core on-line.
COCHRANE: Oh, wow.
(Cochrane has spotted the Earth below)
LAFORGE: You ain't seen nothing yet.
[Enterprise-E corridor]

PICARD: If you see Commander Riker or any of my crew, give them this.
LILY: What is it?
PICARD: Orders to find a quiet corner of North America and ...stay out of history's way.
LILY: Well, good luck.
PICARD: To both of us.
LILY: You're not leaving are you?
PICARD: Lily, when I was held captive on the Borg ship, my crew risked every thing to save me. There is ...someone still on this ship, and I owe him the same.
LILY: Go and find your friend.
(the escape pods exit the Enterprise-E as Picard goes to engineering)
[Enterprise-E engineering]

BORG QUEEN (OC): What's wrong Locutus? Isn't this familiar?
BORG QUEEN: Organic minds are such fragile things. How could you forget me so quickly? We were very close, you and I. You can still hear our song.
PICARD: Yes, ...I remember you. You were there all the time. But that ship and all the Borg on it were destroyed.
BORG QUEEN: You think in such three-dimensional terms. How small you've become. Data understands me. Don't you, Data?
(Data is standing in a Borg cubicle)
PICARD: What have you done to him?
BORG QUEEN: Given him what he always wanted, flesh and blood.
PICARD: Let him go. He's not the one you want.
BORG QUEEN: Are you offering yourself to us?
PICARD: Offering myself? ...That's it. I remember now. It wasn't enough that you assimilate me. I had to give myself freely to the Borg, ...to you.
BORG QUEEN: You flatter yourself. I've overseen the assimilation of countless millions. You were no different.
PICARD: You're lying. You wanted more than just another Borg drone. You wanted a human being with a mind of his own, who could bridge the gulf between humanity and the Borg. You wanted a counterpart, but I resisted. I fought you.
BORG QUEEN: You can't begin to imagine the life you denied yourself.
PICARD: It's not too late. Locutus could still be with you, just in the way you wanted. An equal. Let Data go and I will take my place at your side, willingly without any resistance.
BORG QUEEN: Such a noble creature. A quality we sometimes lack. We will add your distinctiveness to our own. Welcome home, ...Locutus. ...Data, you are free to go.
PICARD: Data, go.
DATA: No. I do not wish to go.
BORG QUEEN: As you can see I have already found an equal. Data! Deactivate the self-destruct sequence.
PICARD: Data! No, don't do it. ...Data, listen to me.
COMPUTER VOICE: Autodestruct sequence deactivated.
BORG QUEEN: Now enter the encryption codes and give me computer control.
PICARD: Data! ...Data.
DATA: He will make an excellent drone.
(Picard is taken by two drones)
[Phoenix cockpit]

LAFORGE: Plasma injectors are on-line. Everything's looking good. I think we're ready.
RIKER: They should be out there right now. We better break the warp barrier in the next five minutes if we're going to get their attention.
LAFORGE: Main cells are charged and ready.
RIKER: Let's do it.
COCHRANE: Engage.
LAFORGE: Warp field is looking good. Structural integrity is holding.
RIKER: Speed, twenty thousand kilometres per second.
COCHRANE: Sweet Jesus!
(Cochrane has spotted the Enterprise in orbit)
RIKER: Relax, Doctor. I'm sure they're just here to give us a send-off.

[Enterprise-E engineering]

(Picard is on the Borg bio-bed)
DATA: I am bringing the external sensors on-line.
(the Phoenix appears on the viewscreen)
[Phoenix cockpit]

RIKER: Thirty seconds to warp threshold. ...Approaching light-speed.
COCHRANE: We're at critical velocity.

[Enterprise-E engineering]

DATA: Quantum torpedoes locked.
BORG QUEEN: Destroy them.
(three torpedoes fly towards the Phoenix)
BORG QUEEN: Watch your future's end.
(the torpedoes miss)
BORG QUEEN: Data!
DATA: Resistance is futile.
(Data breaks the plasma coolant conduit and engineering begins to flood. Picard grabs a hanging tube and begins to climb. The Borg Queen grabs Picard's leg. Data rises from the coolant and pulls the Bog Queen off Picard and throws her into the coolant)
[Phoenix cockpit]

RIKER: That should be enough. Throttle back. Take us out of warp.
COCHRANE: Is that Earth?
LAFORGE (OC): That's it.
COCHRANE: It's so small.
RIKER: It's about to get a whole lot bigger.
[Enterprise-E engineering]

(Picard drains the coolant, finds the Borg Queen's head and neck that is still blinking. He breaks the neck)
DATA: Captain.
PICARD: Data, ...are you all right?
DATA: I would imagine that I look worse than I ...feel. ...Strange. ...Part of me is sorry she is dead.
PICARD: She was unique.
DATA: She brought me closer to humanity than I could have thought possible. And for a time I was tempted by her offer.
PICARD: How long a time?
DATA: Zero point six eight seconds, sir. For an android ...that is nearly an eternity.
Captain's log, April 5th 2063. The voyage of the Phoenix was a success, ...again. The alien ship detected the warp signature and is on its way to rendezvous with history.

[Montana settlement]

(the T'plana-Hath lands and the Vulcans begin to emerge)
COCHRANE: By God! They're really from another world.
RIKER: And they're going to want to meet the man who flew that warp ship.
VULCAN: Live long, and prosper.
(Cochrane attempts to return the Vulcan salute but settles for a handshake)
COCHRANE: Thanks.
PICARD: I think it's time we made a discrete exit.
RIKER: Riker to Enterprise. Stand by to beam us up.
LILY: You've got to go? ...I envy you. The world you're going to.
PICARD: I envy you. Taking these first steps into a new frontier. ...I shall miss you, Lily.
(Picard kisses her on the cheek)
PICARD: Picard to Enterprise. Energise.
[Enterprise-E bridge]

PICARD: Report.
WORF: The moon's gravitational field obscured our warp signature. The Vulcans did not detect us.
LAFORGE: Captain, I've reconfigured our warp field to match the chronometric readings of the Borg sphere.
PICARD: Recreate the vortex, Commander.
LAFORGE: Aye sir.
RIKER: All decks report ready.
DATA: Helm standing by.
PICARD: Mister Data, lay in a course for the twenty-fourth century. I suspect our future is there waiting for us.
DATA (OC): Course laid in, sir.
PICARD: Make it so.
[Montana settlement]

(while Lily watches the Enterprise enters the vortex. Cochrane is socialising in the bar with the Vulcans. They are startled when he thumps the jukebox into life)






(a champagne bottle, Dom Pérignon 2265, tumbles through space to christen U.S.S. Enterprise NCC 1701-B in the view of a crowd watching from Spacedock)

[Enterprise-B bridge]

JOURNALIST #3: Captain Kirk, how does it feel to be back on the Enterprise Bridge? ...Can I ask you a few questions? ...We'd like to know how you feel how you're going...
HARRIMAN: Excuse me, excuse me, excuse me. There will be plenty of time for questions later. I'm Captain John Harriman and I'd like to welcome you all aboard.
KIRK: It's our pleasure.
HARRIMAN: I just want you to know how excited we all are to have a group of living legends with us on our maiden voyage. ...I remember reading about your missions when I was in grade school.
KIRK: Oh, really. Well, ...may we have a look around?
HARRIMAN: Please, ...please.
CHEKOV: Demora!
JOURNALIST #1: Captain, ...this is the first Starship Enterprise in thirty years without James T. Kirk in command. How do you feel about that, sir?
KIRK: Oh just fine. I'm glad to be here to send her on her way.
JOURNALIST #3: And what have you been doing since you retired?
KIRK: Keeping busy.
JOURNALIST #3: Captain Kirk...
HARRIMAN (OC): Why don't we give the Captain a chance to look around?
(Kirk takes a longing glance at the Captain's chair)
CHEKOV: Captain. ... Excuse me. ...I'd like you to meet the helmsman of the Enterprise-B. Demora. ...Ensign Demora Sulu.
DEMORA: It's a pleasure to meet you, sir. My father's told me some ...interesting stories about you.
KIRK: Your father is Hikaru Sulu?
DEMORA: Yes sir.
CHEKOV: Oh, you've met her before, when she was...
KIRK: It wasn't so long ago. ...It couldn't have been more than....
CHEKOV: Twelve years, sir.
KIRK: Twelve years?
CHEKOV: Absolutely.
KIRK: Incredible. Congratulations, Ensign. It wouldn't be the Enterprise without a Sulu at the helm.
DEMORA: Thank you, sir.
CHEKOV: I'm sure Hikaru must be very proud of you.
DEMORA (OC): I hope so.
CHEKOV: I was never that young.
KIRK: No, ...you were younger!
SCOTT: Damn fine ship if you ask me.
KIRK: Scotty, ...it absolutely amazes me.
SCOTT: What would that be, sir?
KIRK: Sulu. When did he find the time to have family?
SCOTT: Well like you always say, if something's important, you'll make the time.
(Kirk takes a second glance at the Captain's chair)
SCOTT: Ah, so that's why you seem so restless. Finding retirement a little lonely, are we?
KIRK: You know, I'm glad you're an engineer. With a tact like that you'd make a lousy psychiatrist.
SCOTT: Ha, ha, ha...
HARRIMAN: Excuse me, gentlemen, ...if you'll take your seats.
KIRK: Yes, of course.
(Kirk gives the Captain's chair a nostalgic pat as he moves away)
HARRIMAN: Prepare to leave Spacedock. Aft thrusters ahead one-quarter, port and starboard at station keeping. ...Captain Kirk, I'd be honoured if you'd give the order to get underway.
KIRK: Thank you very much. I...
HARRIMAN: Please, sir.
KIRK: No.
HARRIMAN: Please, I insist.
KIRK: Take us out.
(the crew breaks out into general applause)
CHEKOV: Very good, sir.
SCOTT: Brought a tear to my eye.
KIRK: Oh, be quiet.
(as Kirk, Scott and Chekov return from their tour of the ship the journalists accost them again)
JOURNALIST #1: Gentlemen! Gentlemen! Tell me. Now that you've seen the rest of the ship, How's it feel to be back?
KIRK/SCOTT/CHEKOV: Fine. Fine. Fine.
HARRIMAN: Ladies and gentlemen, we've just cleared the asteroid belt. Our course today will take us out past Pluto and then back to Spacedock. Just a quick run around the block.
CONN OFFICER: Captain, will there be time to conduct any tests on the warp drive system?
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: We're picking up a distress call, Captain.
HARRIMAN: On... On speakers.
COMM VOICE: This is the transport ship Lakul. We're caught in some kind of energy distortion. Two ships in our convoy. ...We're trapped in a severe gravimetric distortion. We can't break free. We need immediate help. It' tearing us apart. This is the trans...
SCIENCE OFFICER: The Lakul is one of two ships transporting El-Aurian refugees to Earth.
HARRIMAN: Ensign Sulu, can you locate them?
DEMORA: The ships are bearing at three one zero mark two one five. Distance, three light years.
HARRIMAN: Signal the closest starship. We're in no condition to mount a rescue. ...We don't even have a full crew aboard.
NAVIGATOR: We're the only one in range, sir.
HARRIMAN: ...Well, then, ...I guess it's up to us. Helm, lay in an intercept course and engage at maximum warp.
DEMORA (OC): Aye sir.
SCOTT: (to Kirk) Captain, is there something wrong with your chair?
DEMORA: We're within visual range of the energy distortion, Captain.
HARRIMAN: On screen.
CHEKOV (OC): What the hell is that?
DEMORA: I've located the transport ships. ...Their hulls are starting to buckle under the stress. ...They won't survive much longer.
LIEUTENANT: We're encountering severe gravimetric distortions from the energy ribbon, Captain.
HARRIMAN: We'll have to keep our distance. We don't want to get pulled in too.
KIRK: Tractor beam! Tractor beam.
HARRIMAN: We don't have a tractor beam.
KIRK: You left Spacedock without a tractor beam?
HARRIMAN: It won't be installed until Tuesday. ...Ensign Sulu, try generating a subspace field around the ships. That might break them free.
DEMORA: There's too much quantum interference, Captain.
HARRIMAN: What about... What about venting plasma from the warp nacelles? That might disrupt the ribbon's hold on the ships.
NAVIGATOR: Aye sir. ...Releasing drive-plasma. ...It's not having any effect, sir. I think the ribbon's hold...
DEMORA: Sir! The starboard vessel's hull is collapsing...
CHEKOV (OC): How many people were aboard that ship?
DEMORA (OC): Two hundred sixty-five.
SCIENCE OFFICER: Sir, the Lakul's hull integrity is down to twelve percent.
HARRIMAN: Captain Kirk, ...I would appreciate any suggestions you might have.
KIRK: First ...move us within transporter range and beam those people aboard the Enterprise.
HARRIMAN: What about the gravimetric distortions? They'll tear us apart.
KIRK: Risk is part of the game if you want to sit in that chair.
HARRIMAN: Helm, close to within transporter range.
KIRK: And second, ...turn that damned thing off.
(the cameraman turns off the floodlight)
DEMORA: We're within range, sir.
HARRIMAN: Beam them directly to Sickbay.
LIEUTENANT (OC): Aye sir.
CHEKOV: How big is your medical staff?
HARRIMAN: The medical staff ...doesn't arrive 'til Tuesday.
CHEKOV: (mutters in Russian) (to journalists) You and you and you. You've just become nurses. Let's go.
DEMORA: Main engineering reports fluctuations in the warp plasma relays.
LIEUTENANT: Sir, I'm having trouble locking onto them. They appear to be ...in some sort of temporal flux.
KIRK (OC): Scotty?
SCOTT (OC): What the hell.
SCOTT: Their life signs are ...are phasing in and out of our space-time continuum.
KIRK: Phasing? To where?
NAVIGATOR: Sir! Their hull's collapsing!
KIRK (OC): Beam them out of there, Scotty!
SCOTT: Transport complete. ...I got forty-seven ...out of one hundred fifty.
(suddenly the ship is rocked by a huge explosion)
KIRK: Report!
SCIENCE OFFICER: We're caught in a gravimetric field emanating from the trailing edge of the ribbon.
HARRIMAN: All engines, full reverse!

[Enterprise-B sickbay]

CHEKOV: You're going to be all right. We are going to help you. We are going to help you.
JOURNALIST #2: It's okay. Everything is fine.
SORAN: Why? ...Why?
JOURNALIST #2: It's all right. You're safe. You're on the Enterprise.
SORAN: No. No, I have to go. I have to go back.
JOURNALIST #2: You have to stay right here.
SORAN: You don't understand! Let me go back! Let me go back! ...Let me go back! Let me go back, please!
(Chekov tranquillises Soran)
JOURNALIST #3 (OC): What was he talking about?
JOURNALIST #2: I have no idea.
CHEKOV: Can I help you?
GUINAN: It's going to be okay.
CHEKOV: You'll be all right. You just need to rest. Come over here.

[Enterprise-B bridge]

SCOTT: There's just no way to disrupt a gravimetric field of this magnitude!
LIEUTENANT: Hull integrity at eighty-two percent.
SCOTT: But I do have a theory.
KIRK: I thought you might.
SCOTT: An anti-matter discharge directly ahead might disrupt the field long enough for us to break away.
KIRK: Photon torpedo?
SCOTT: Aye sir.
SCIENCE OFFICER: We're losing main power.
KIRK (OC): Load torpedo bays, prepare to fire on my command.
DEMORA: Captain, ...we don't have any torpedoes.
KIRK: Don't tell me. ...Tuesday.
LIEUTENANT: Hull integrity at forty percent.
SCOTT: Captain, it may be possible to simulate a torpedo blast using a resonance burst from the main deflector dish.
KIRK: Where are the deflector relays?
DEMORA: Deck fifteen, section twenty-one alpha.
HARRIMAN: I'll go. You have the bridge.
KIRK: Wait! Your place is on the bridge of your ship. ...I'll take care of it.
KIRK: Scotty! Keep things together until I get back.
SCOTT: I always do.
LIEUTENANT Forty-five seconds to structural collapse!
SCOTT: Bridge to Captain Kirk.

[Enterprise-B deflector room]

KIRK: Kirk here.
SCOTT (on intercom): I don't know how much longer I can hold her together!
KIRK: That's it. Let's go!

[Enterprise-B bridge]

HARRIMAN: Activate main deflector.
SCOTT: We're breaking free.
(another explosion hits the Enterprise in the deflector dish area)
DEMORA (OC): It's all right. I'm increasing power to compensate. ...We're clear.
HARRIMAN: You did it, Kirk! Damage report, Ensign.
DEMORA: There's some buckling on the starboard nacelle. ...And we've also got a hull breach in engineering section. Emergency forcefields in place and holding.
SCOTT (OC): Where?
DEMORA: Sections twenty through twenty-eight on decks thirteen, fourteen ...and fifteen.
SCOTT: Bridge to Captain Kirk. ...Captain Kirk, please respond. ...Have Chekov meet me on deck fifteen.

[Enterprise-B corridor]

CHEKOV: My God... Was anyone in there?
SCOTT: Aye.

78 Years Later

[Enterprise sailing vessel]

(all the Enterprise crew are in nineteenth century naval dress)
RIKER (OC): Bring out the prisoner!
PICARD: Mister Worf, I always knew this day would come. Are you prepared to face the charges?
TROI: Answer him!
WORF: I am prepared.
RIKER: 'We, the officers and crew of the U.S.S. Enterprise, being of sound mind and judgment, hereby make the following charges against Lieutenant Worf. One. That he did knowingly and wilfully perform above and beyond the call of duty on countless occasions. Two. Most seriously, that he has earned the admiration and respect of the entire crew.'
PICARD: Mister Worf. I hereby promote you to the rank of Lieutenant Commander, with all the rights and privileges thereto. And may God have mercy on your soul.
(the whole crew cheer and applaud)
LAFORGE: Hip! Hip!
ALL: Hooray!
LAFORGE: Hip! Hip!
ALL: Hooray!
LAFORGE: Hip! Hip!
ALL: Hooray!
PICARD: Congratulations, Mister Worf.
WORF: Thank you, sir.
RIKER: Extend the plank!
CREWMEMBERS: Into the sea with him. ...Feed him to the sharks. ...Walk the plank. etc.
RIKER: Lower the badge of office.
(an officer's hat is lowered over the end of the plank)
RIKER: He'll never make it. No one ever has.
(Worf jumps, grabs the hat and lands safely back on the plank)
PICARD: If there's one thing I've learnt over the years, is never to underestimate a Klingon.
(Worf dons the hat to cheers)
RIKER: Remove the plank.
(Crusher shows particular amusement as Worf drops into the sea)
PICARD: Number One. That's 'Retract the plank' not 'Remove the plank'.
RIKER: Of course, sir. ...Sorry!
WORF: Aarrgh! ...Aarrgh!
DATA: Doctor, I must confess I am uncertain as to why someone falling into freezing water is amusing.
CRUSHER: Oh, it's all done in good fun, Data.
DATA: Fun?
CRUSHER: Fun.
DATA: I do not understand.
CRUSHER: You've got to get into the spirit of things. Learn to be spontaneous. Live in the moment. Do something unexpected. Get it!
DATA: Got it.
(Data pushes Crusher into the sea knocking Worf back in who was climbing out)
CRUSHER: Oh! ...Oh!
LAFORGE: Data. That was not funny.
RIKER: All hands make sail! T'gansuls and courses. Stand by the braces!
PICARD: Will, ...just imagine what it was like. No engines. No computers. Just the wind and the sea and the stars to guide you.
RIKER: Bad food, brutal discipline. ...No women!
COMM VOICE: Bridge to Captain Picard.
PICARD: Picard here.
COMM VOICE: There's a personal message for you from Earth.
PICARD: Put it through down here. The best thing about a life at sea was that no one could reach you. This was freedom, Will.
PICARD: Computer. Arch.
RIKER: Look alive there!
(the holodeck arch appears on the deck and Picard reads the message)
TROI: Here. Take the wheel. ...Captain, are you all right?
PICARD: Yes. I'm fine. ...Excuse me.
PICARD: Computer. Exit.
RIKER: Mister La Forge. Set the royals and stunsails.
LAFORGE: What's a stunsail, sir?
RIKER: You see the last yardarm? Just above that...
COMM VOICE: Bridge to holodeck three.
RIKER: Riker here.
COMM VOICE: We're picking up a distress call from the Amargosa observatory, sir. They say they're under attack.
RIKER: RED ALERT! All hands to battle stations! Captain Picard to the bridge.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

(most of the bridge crew are still dressed in period costume)
RIKER: It looks like we're too late.
WORF: There are no other ships in the system.
RIKER: Captain, we are approaching Amargosa. It looks like the observatory took quite a beating.
PICARD: Survivors?
DATA: Sensors show five life signs aboard the station, Captain.
RIKER: The station complement was nineteen.
PICARD: Stand down from RED ALERT. ...Number One, ...will you begin an investigation? I'll be in my ready room.
RIKER: Sir?
PICARD: Make it so. Just do it!
RIKER: Mister Worf.
WORF: Aye sir.

[Amargosa Observatory]

RIKER: Mister Worf, you're with me.
WORF: These blast patterns are consistent with a type-three disruptor.
RIKER: Great! That narrows it to Romulan, Breen and Klingon.
WORF (OC): Over here!
WORF: It's all right. Do not struggle.
RIKER: It's okay, we're right here. ...I've got you. I'm Commander William Riker from the Starship Enterprise.
SORAN: Soran. ...Doctor Tolian Soran.
RIKER: Who attacked you, Doctor?
SORAN: I don't know, it all happened so fast.
SECURITY OFFICER: Commander, ...you'd better take a look at this.
WORF: Romulans!

[Data's quarters]

LAFORGE: Data, whatever possessed you to push her in the water in the first place?
DATA: I was attempting to ...get into the spirit of things. I thought it would be amusing. ...Spot! ...Is she still angry?
LAFORGE: I'd stay out of sickbay for a couple of days if I were you.
(Data goes to a closet and gets out the emotion chip)
LAFORGE: Data, ...you're not actually thinking about using that thing are you?
DATA: I have considered it for many months. In the light of my recent episode with Doctor Crusher now would be the appropriate time.
LAFORGE: I thought you were worried it would overload your neural net.
DATA: That is true. However, I believe my growth as an artificial lifeform has reached an impasse. For thirty-four years I have endeavoured to become more 'human', to grow beyond my original programming. Still I am still unable to grasp such a basic concept as humour. ...This emotion chip may be the only answer. ...Geordi...
LAFORGE: All right. ...Listen! At the first sign of trouble, I'm going to deactivate it. Agreed?
DATA: Agreed.

[Enterprise-D ready room]

RIKER: We found two dead Romulans on the station. We're analysing their equipment to see if we can determine what ship they're from.
PICARD: There's still no indication of why they attacked the station?
RIKER: They practically tore the place apart. Accessed the central computer, turned the cargo bay inside out. Obviously they were looking for something.
PICARD: This could signify a new Romulan threat in this sector. Inform Starfleet Command.
RIKER: You want me to contact Starfleet?
PICARD: Is there a problem?
RIKER: No sir. ...There was something else, Captain. One of the scientists, a Doctor Soran, insisted on speaking with you. I told him you were very busy, but he said it was absolutely imperative that he speak with you right away.
PICARD: Understood. That'll be all.
RIKER: Sir, is there anything wr?...
PICARD: No. ...Thank you.

[Enterprise-D Ten Forward]

GUINAN: Gentlemen, something new from Forcas Three.
(she pours two glasses, Data takes a drink)
LAFORGE: What?
DATA: I believe this beverage has provoked an emotional response.
LAFORGE: Really? What do you feel?
DATA: I am uncertain. Because I have had little experience with emotion I am unable to ...articulate the sensation.
GUINAN: Emotion?
LAFORGE: I'll explain later.
DATA: Ouf!
GUINAN: It looks like he hates it.
DATA: Yes. That is it. I hate this.
LAFORGE: Data, I think the chip is working.
DATA: Yes. I hate this! It is revolting!
GUINAN: More?
DATA: Please.
PICARD: I'm looking for a Doctor Soran from the observatory. ...Doctor Soran.
SORAN: Yes, ah yes, Captain. ...Thank you for coming.
PICARD: I understand there's something urgent you wish to discuss with me.
SORAN: Yes. I must return to the observatory immediately. I must continue a critical experiment I've been running on the Amargosa star.
PICARD: We're still conducting our investigation into the attack. ...As soon as that is complete, then I will allow you and your colleagues to return. But until then there is nothing I can do.
SORAN: Timing is very important in my experiments. If it is not completed in the next twelve hours, years of research will be lost.
PICARD: We're doing the best we can. If you'll excuse me.
SORAN: They say 'time is the fire in which we burn'. ...Right now, Captain, my time is running out. ...We leave so many things unfinished in our lives. ...I know you understand.
PICARD: I'll see what I can do.
(as Soran leaves he recognises Guinan and she is aware of his presence)

[Enterprise engineering]

WORF (OC): We have analysed the Romulan tricorders. They were scanning for a signature particle of a compound called trilithium.
RIKER: Trilithium?
WORF (OC): Yes. An experimental compound the Romulans have been working on. Trilithium is a nuclear inhibitor. In theory, it could stop all fusion within a star. However the Romulans never found a way to stabilise it.
RIKER: Why would they look for it on a Federation observatory? It doesn't make sense.
WORF: I do not know.
RIKER: Have Geordi and Data go over with the next Away Team. Tell them to scan the observatory for trilithium.
WORF: Aye sir.

[Amargosa Observatory]

LAFORGE: Well, there's no sign of any trilithium over here.
DATA: Ha, ha, ha! I get it. Ha. ha, ha! I get it.
LAFORGE: You get what?
DATA: When you said to Commander Riker 'The clown can stay...' Ha, ha, ha. '...but the Ferengi in the gorilla suit has to go.' Ha, ha, ha.
LAFORGE: What are you talking about?
DATA: During the Farpoint mission. We were on the bridge and you told the joke. That was the punch line. Ha, ha, ha!
LAFORGE: Farpoint? Data, that was seven years ago.
DATA: I know. I just got it. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Very funny! Ha, ha, ha...
LAFORGE: Wait a minute, ...there's a door hidden right behind here. I can see the separation with my VISOR.
DATA: There appears to be a dampening field in operation. I cannot scan beyond the bulkhead.
LAFORGE: There doesn't seem to be a control panel or an access port.
DATA: It appears to be magnetically sealed. ...I believe I can reverse the polarity by attenuating my axial servo. ...'Open sesame.' You could say ...I have a ...magnetic personality. Ha, ha, ha! Humour I love it!
LAFORGE: Data, come take a look at this, will you? Have you ever seen a solar probe with this kind of configuration?
(Data opens and closes his tricorder like a mouth answering Geordi's question)
DATA: No, Geordi. I have not. Have you? ...No I have not. It is most unusual. ...Ha, ha, ha. Mister Tricorder! Ha, ha, ha.
LAFORGE: Just see if you can help me get these panels open.
DATA: Make it so.
LAFORGE: Whoa! My VISOR's picking up something in the theta band. It could be a trilithium signature.
(Data continues chuckling at his witticism)
LAFORGE: Data, we don't have time for this!
DATA: I cannot help myself. ...I think that something is wrong.
(Data suddenly seems to be having an 'electronic' seizure)
LAFORGE: Data! ...Data, are you all right?
DATA: I believe the emotion chip has ...overloaded my positronic relay.
LAFORGE: We better get you back to the ship. La Forge to Enterprise. ...La Forge to Enterprise.
SORAN: Gentlemen, is there a problem?
LAFORGE: Doctor Soran? Yeah, there appears to be some sort of damping field in here. It's blocking our com signal. Can you turn it off?
SORAN: Of course. I'd be only too happy to.
(Soran knocks Geordi out and points a phaser at Data)
DATA: Please. Please ...do not hurt me. Please.

[Picard's quarters]

PICARD: Yes. Come. ...Yes, Counselor. Is there something I can do for you?
TROI: I've come to see if there's anything I can do for you.
PICARD: Oh, it's just family matters. ...You never met my brother and his wife, did you?
(Picard opens a photo-album that he had been studying)
TROI: No.
PICARD: Robert. ...So opinionated. So pompous and arrogant. He always had to have the last word. But he mellowed a little bit in the last few years. I was going to get together with them all next month on Earth. I thought we'd go to San Francisco. René's always wanted to see Starfleet Academy.
TROI: René? Oh, your nephew.
PICARD: He's so unlike his father. He's a dreamer. Imaginative. ...Very gentle.
TROI: What's happened?
PICARD: Robert and René, they're... ...burned to death in a fire.
TROI: I'm sorry.
PICARD: That's all right, Counselor. These things happen.
TROI: Captain, it's not all right.
PICARD: I can't help keep thinking about ...about all the experiences that René is not going to have. Not going to Academy, reading books and listening to music, falling in love. ...Building a life. ...Well, it's not going to happen now.
TROI: I didn't realise he meant so much to you.
PICARD: I'd come to feel that René was as close as I would get to having a child of my own.
TROI: Your family history is very important to you, isn't it?
PICARD: Right. Oh, ...from being a small child, I can remember being told about the family line. The Picard who fought at Trafalgar. The Picard who won the Nobel Prize for chemistry. The Picard's who settled the first Martian colony. When Robert married and had a son, I...
TROI: ...You felt it was no longer your responsibility to carry on the family line.
PICARD: Right. Yes. That's it exactly. You know, Counselor, Recently I've become very much aware that there are fewer days ahead than there are behind. ...But I took comfort from the fact that ...the family would go on. But now there'll be no more Picards.
(an explosion lights up the cabin window)

[Enterprise-D bridge]

PICARD: Report.
RIKER: A quantum implosion has occurred within the Amargosa star. All nuclear fusion is breaking down.
PICARD: How is that possible?
WORF: Sensor records show that the observatory launched a solar probe into the sun a few moments ago.
RIKER: The star is going to collapse in a matter of minutes.
WORF: Sir, the implosion has produced a level twelve shock wave.
TROI: That'll destroy everything in this system.
TRANSPORTER CHIEF (on intercom): Transporter room to bridge. I can't locate Commander La Forge or Mister Data, sir.
RIKER: Have they come back to the ship?
WORF: No sir. They are not on board.
PICARD: How long before the shock wave hits the observatory?
WORF: Four minutes, forty seconds.
PICARD: Number One.
RIKER (OC): Mister Worf.
WORF (OC): Aye sir.

[Amargosa Observatory]

LURSA (on intercom): Soran, transmit your coordinates.
(Soran hears Riker and Worf approaching and starts a phaser battle with them)
RIKER: What the hell's he doing?
PICARD (on intercom): Enterprise to Commander Riker, you have two minutes left.
RIKER: Did you hear that, Soran? We've got a level twelve shock wave coming in. We've got to get out of here!

[Enterprise-D bridge]

ENSIGN HAYES: Sir. A Klingon Bird-of-Prey is decloaking off the port bow.
PICARD: What?

[Amargosa Observatory]

(the phaser fight continues)
RIKER: Data! See if you can get to Geordi!
DATA: I ... I cannot, sir.
B'ETOR (on intercom): Prepare for transport.
(Geordi and Soran transport out to the Klingon Bird-of-Prey)

[Enterprise-D bridge]

TRANSPORTER CHIEF (OC): Commander Riker's team is aboard, sir.
PICARD: Helm! Warp one. Engage!

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

B'ETOR: You've done it, Soran.
(whereupon Soran punches B'Etor and a scuffle ensues until Soran is restrained)
B'ETOR: Wait! ...I hope for your sake you were initiating a mating ritual.
SORAN: You got careless. The Romulans came looking for their missing trilithium.
B'ETOR: Impossible. We left no survivors on their outpost.
SORAN: They knew it was on the observatory. If the Enterprise hadn't intervened, they would have found it.
LURSA: They didn't find it, and now we have a weapon of unlimited power.
SORAN: No, Lursa, I have the weapon. And if you ever want me to give it to you, I would advise you to be a little more careful in the future.
B'ETOR: Perhaps we are tired of waiting.
SORAN: Without my research ...the trilithium is worthless, ...as are your plans to reconquer the Klingon Empire. ...Set course for the Veridian system. Maximum warp.
LURSA: Bosh-ta-JaH Veridian (Set course for Veridian)

[Enterprise sickbay]

CRUSHER: He's an El-Aurian, ...over three hundred years old. He lost his entire family when the Borg destroyed his world. Soran escaped with a handful of other refugees aboard a ship called the Lakul. That ship was later destroyed by some kind of energy ribbon, but Soran and forty-six others were rescued by the Enterprise-B.
RIKER: That was the mission where James Kirk was killed.
CRUSHER: I checked the passenger manifest of the Lakul. Guess who else was on board?

[Guinan's quarters]

GUINAN: Soran is a name I haven't heard in a long time.
PICARD: You remember him?
GUINAN: Yes.
PICARD: Guinan. It is very important that you tell me everything that you know. We think that Soran has developed a weapon, ...a terrible weapon. One that might even give him enough power to destroy...
GUINAN: Soran doesn't care about weapons or power. He just cares about getting back to the Nexus.
PICARD: What's the 'Nexus'?
GUINAN: The energy ribbon that destroyed that ship was just not some random phenomenon travelling through the universe. It's a doorway to another place that we call the Nexus. It's a place that I've tried very, very hard to forget.
PICARD: What happened to you?
GUINAN: It was like being inside joy. As if joy was something tangible ...and you could wrap yourself in it like a blanket. And never in my entire life have I been as content.
PICARD: And then you were beamed away from there.
GUINAN: Pulled. Ripped away. None of us wanted to go. I would have done anything, ...anything to get back there. But once I realised that wasn't possible I learned to live without that.
PICARD: What about Soran?
GUINAN: If he's still obsessed he could be a very, very dangerous man.
PICARD: Why would he destroy a star? ...Thank you, Guinan.
GUINAN: If you go, you're not going to care about anything. Not this ship, Soran, nothing. All you'll want is to stay in the Nexus. And you're not going to want to come back.

[Bird-of-Prey quarters]

(Soran is studying Geordi's VISOR)
SORAN: Marvellous technology. This is a remarkable piece of equipment.
LAFORGE: I'm glad you approve.
SORAN: Not very stylish though is it? ...Have you ever considered a prosthesis that would make you look a little more, ...how can I say? ...More normal.
LAFORGE: What's normal?
SORAN: What's normal? Well, that's a good question. Normal is what everyone else is, and you are not.
LAFORGE: Why don't we just get down to it? What do you want?
SORAN: As you may or may not be aware, I am an El-Aurian. Some people call us a race of 'listeners'. We listen. Right now, Mister La Forge, you have my complete attention. I want to listen to everything you know about trilithium.

Captains log, stardate 48632.4. Doctor Crusher has informed me that Data's emotion chip has been fused into his neural net and cannot be removed. However she believes he is fit for duty, so I have asked him to join me in Stellar Cartography.

[Enterprise Stellar Cartography]

DATA (OC): According to our information, the ribbon is a conflux of temporal energy which travels through this galaxy every thirty-nine point one years. It will pass through this sector in approximately forty-two hours.
PICARD: Yes. Guinan was right. She said that Soran was trying to get back to the ribbon. Now if that's true there has to be some connection with the Amargosa star. Data, give me a list of anything that was affected by the star's destruction, no matter how insignificant.
PICARD: Data?
DATA: Sorry sir. It will take the computer a few moments to compile the information.
PICARD: Data, ...are you all right?
DATA: No sir. I am finding it difficult to concentrate. I believe I am overwhelmed with feelings of remorse, regret concerning my actions on the observatory.
PICARD: What do you mean?
DATA: I wanted to save Geordi, but I experienced something I could not expect. ...Fear. I was afraid. ...According to our current information, the destruction of the Amargosa star has had the following effects in this sector. ...Gamma emissions have increased by point zero five percent. The Starship Bozeman was forced to make a course correction. ...Ambient magnetic fields...
PICARD: Wait. The Bozeman. ...Why would it make a course correction?
DATA: The destruction of the Amargosa star has altered the gravitational forces throughout this sector. As a result any ship passing through this region would have to make a minor course correction.
PICARD: A minor course correction? ...Where's the ribbon now?
DATA: This is its current position.
PICARD: Can you project its course?
DATA: Captain, ...I cannot continue with this investigation. I wish to be deactivated until Doctor Crusher can remove the emotion chip.
PICARD: Are you having some kind of malfunction?
DATA: No sir. I simply do not have the ability to control these emotions.
PICARD: Data, I have nothing but sympathy for what you are feeling, but right now I need you to...
DATA: Sir! I no longer want these emotions! Deactivating me is the only viable solution.
PICARD: Part of having feelings is learning to integrate them into your life, Data, ...learning to live with them. No matter what the circumstances...
DATA: No, I cannot...
PICARD: You will not be deactivated! You're an officer on board this ship and I require you to perform your duty. That is an order, Commander!
DATA: Yes sir. ...I will try, sir.
PICARD: Sometimes it takes courage to try, Data. Courage can be an emotion too. Now can you project the course of the ribbon?
DATA: I believe so.
PICARD: Enhance grid nine-A. ...Where was the Amargosa star? ...Now you said when the Amargosa star was destroyed, it affected the gravitational forces in this sector. Did the computer take that into account when it projected the course of the ribbon?
DATA: No sir. I will make the appropriate adjustments.
PICARD: That's what Soran's doing, ...he's changing the course of the ribbon. ...But why? Why would he try to change its path? ...Why doesn't he just fly into it with a ship?
DATA: Our records show that every ship which has approached the ribbon has either been destroyed or severely damaged.
PICARD: He can't get to the ribbon, so he's trying to make the ribbon come to him. ...Data, does it pass near any M-Class planets?
DATA: Yes sir. There are two in the Veridian system.
PICARD: It's close to Veridian Three ...but not close enough. ...Data, what would happen to the ribbon's course if Soran destroyed the Veridian star itself? ...That's where he's going.
DATA: It should be noted, sir, that the collapse of the Veridian star would produce a shock wave similar to the one we observed at Amargosa.
PICARD: Destroying all the planets in this system.
DATA: Veridian Three is uninhabited. However Veridian Four supports a pre-industrial humanoid society.
PICARD: Population?
DATA: Two hundred thirty million, sir.
PICARD: Picard to bridge.
WORF (on intercom): Worf here, sir.
PICARD: Set a course for the Veridian system, maximum warp.

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

LURSA: Did you get anything from the human?
SORAN: No. His heart just wasn't in it.
KLINGON HELM: We have entered orbit of Veridian Three.
SORAN: Prepare to transport me to the surface.
B'ETOR: Wait. When do we get our payment?
SORAN: This contains all the information you'll need to make a trilithium weapon. ...It's been coded. Once I'm safely to the surface, I'll transmit the decryption sequence to you, ...not before.
KLINGON HELM: Mistress! A Federation starship is entering the system!
LURSA: What? On viewer.
KLINGON HELM (OC): They are hailing us.
B'ETOR: Du'cha! (On speakers)
LURSA (OC): We're still cloaked. They can't see us.
PICARD (on intercom): Klingon vessel. We know what you're doing, and we will destroy any probe launched toward the Veridian star. We demand that you return our Chief Engineer and leave this system immediately.
SORAN: There's no time for this. Eliminate them.
B'ETOR: That's a Galaxy-class starship. We are no match for them.
SORAN: I think it's time we gave Mister La Forge his sight back.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

RIKER: Maybe they're not out there.
PICARD: They're just trying to decide whether a twenty year-old Klingon Bird-of-Prey can be a match for the Federation flagship.
TROI: Perhaps they're on the surface.
WORF: Sir, according to my calculations, a solar probe launched from either the Klingon ship or the planet's surface will take eleven seconds to reach the sun. However, since we do not have an exact point of origin, it will take us between eight and fifteen seconds to lock our weapons onto it.
RIKER: That's a pretty big margin of error. Much too big.
PICARD: Mister Data, how long before the ribbon arrives?
DATA: Approximately forty-seven minutes, sir.
PICARD: I've got to find some way to get to Soran.
WORF: Klingon vessel decloaking directly ahead, sir. ...They are hailing.
PICARD: On screen.
LURSA (on viewscreen): Captain. What an unexpected pleasure.
PICARD: Lursa, It is very important that I speak with Soran.
LURSA (on viewscreen): I'm afraid the Doctor is no longer aboard our ship.
PICARD: Then I will beam to his location.
B'ETOR (on viewscreen): The Doctor values his privacy. He would be quite upset if an armed away team interrupted him.
PICARD: Then I will beam to your ship and you can transport me to Soran.
RIKER: Captain, you can't trust them. For all you know they killed Geordi. They might kill you too.
LURSA (on viewscreen): We did not harm your Engineer. He's been our ...guest.
RIKER: Then return him.
B'ETOR (on viewscreen): In exchange for what?
DATA: Me sir.
PICARD: Me! I will be your prisoner, but first you must beam me to the surface so I can speak with Soran.
B'ETOR (on viewscreen): The Captain would make a much more valuable hostage.
LURSA (on viewscreen): We'll consider it a prisoner exchange.
PICARD: Agreed. ...Have Doctor Crusher meet me in transporter room three. You have the bridge, Number One.

[Enterprise-D transporter room]

TRANSPORTER OFFICER (OC): Receiving the coordinates, Captain.
PICARD: Energise.
(as Picard dematerialises, Geordi materialises and collapses. Doctor Crusher and Nurse Ogawa attend to him)

[Veridian III mountaintop]

(Picard materialises revealing a scaffolding rocket launcher at the summit)
SORAN: Welcome, Captain. ...You must think I'm quite the madman.
PICARD: The thought had crossed my mind.
SORAN: I know why you're here. You're not entirely confident you can shoot down my probe, so you've come to dissuade me from my horrific plan. ...Good luck. ...Now if you'll excuse me, Captain, I'm rather busy.
PICARD: Soran!
(as Picard moves towards Soran he is temporarily stunned but a forcefield)
SORAN: Do be careful, Captain. That's a fifty giga-watt forcefield. I wouldn't want to see you get hurt.

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KLINGON HELM: I have established the link.
LURSA: Put it on viewer. ...It's working. The VISOR's transmitting.
B'ETOR: Where is he?
(Doctor Crusher appears on the viewscreen)
CRUSHER (on viewscreen): (silent) Don't worry, there's been no permanent damage. Your heart is perfectly fine. There's been a little arterial damage.
B'ETOR: Human females are so repulsive.

[Enterprise-D sickbay]

CRUSHER: There's a myocardial degeneration. I've removed the nanaprobe and I think you're going to be fine. I'll need to run some more tests. I'll let you know.
LAFORGE: Thanks, Doc.
LAFORGE: Data, it's okay.
DATA: I am sorry I let you down. I have not been behaving like myself lately.
LAFORGE: No Data, you haven't. You've been behaving like a human.

[Veridian III mountaintop]

PICARD: You don't need to do this, Soran. ...I'm sure we could find another way of getting you into this Nexus.
SORAN: I've spent eighty years looking for another way. Believe me, this is the only one.
(Soran presses some buttons on a keypad and a rocket reveals itself on the launcher)
PICARD: What you're about to do Soran, is no different from when the Borg destroyed your world. They killed millions too, ...including your wife ...and children.
SORAN: Nice try. ...You know, there was a time when I wouldn't hurt a fly. Then the Borg came. And they showed me that if there is one constant in this whole universe. ...It's death. ...Afterwards I began to realise it didn't really matter. We're all going to die sometime. It's just a question of how and when. You will too, Captain. Aren't you beginning to feel time gaining on you? ...It's like a predator. It's stalking you. ...Oh, you can try and outrun it with doctors, medicines, new technologies, but in the end time is going to hunt you down, ...and make the kill.
PICARD: It's our mortality that defines us, Soran. It's part of the truth of our existence.
SORAN: What if I told you I've found a new truth.
PICARD: The Nexus?
SORAN: Time has no meaning there. The predator has no teeth.

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

LURSA: Where is he now?
B'ETOR: He bathed. Now he's roaming the ship. ...He must be the only Engineer who doesn't go to engineering.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

RIKER: Any luck, Mister Worf?
WORF: No sir. I still cannot locate the Captain.
RIKER: The sensors still cannot penetrate the planet biosphere. There's too much interference. Can you find a way to scan for lifeforms?
DATA: I would be happy to, sir. I just love scanning for lifeforms. ...'Life forms, ...you tiny little lifeforms, ...you precious little life forms, ...where are you.'

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

B'ETOR: Finally!

[Enterprise engineering]

FARRELL: Commander, I'd like to run a level three diagnostic on the port plasma relays. I think one of the generators is fluctuating.
LAFORGE: Fine, do that.

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

LURSA: That's it! Replay from time index nine two four. ...Magnify this section and enhance. ...Their shields are operating on a modulation of two five seven point four.
B'ETOR: Adjust our torpedo frequency to match two five seven point four!
(the Bird-of-Prey launches a torpedo attack on the Enterprise)

[Enterprise-D bridge]

WORF: They have found a way to penetrate our shields.
RIKER: Lock phasers and return fire! ...Deanna, take the helm. Get us out of orbit.
DATA: Hull breach on decks thirty-one through thirty-five.
RIKER: Mister Worf, what do we know about that old Klingon ship. Are there any weaknesses?
WORF: It is a Class D-twelve Bird of Prey. They were retired from service because of defective plasma coils.
RIKER: Plasma coils? ...Any way we can use that to our advantage?
WORF: I do not see how. The plasma coil is part of their cloaking device.

[Enterprise engineering]

LAFORGE: Let's get a stabiliser on that conduit. ...Reinforce that starboard interlock. Reroute main power through the secondary coupling.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

RIKER: Data, would a defective plasma coil be susceptible to some sort of ionic pulse?
DATA: Perhaps. Yes! Yes, if we sent a low-level ionic pulse, it might reset the coil and trigger the cloaking device. Excellent idea, sir!
WORF: As their cloak begins to engage, their shields will drop.
RIKER: Well that's two seconds they'll be vulnerable. Mister Data, lock on to their plasma coils.
DATA: No problem.
WORF: Our shields are holding.

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

LURSA: Fire at will.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

RIKER: Mister Worf, prepare a spread of photon torpedoes. We'll have to hit them the instant they begin to cloak.
WORF: Aye sir.
RIKER: We're getting one shot at this. Target their primary reactor.
DATA: I have accessed their coil frequency. Initiating ionic pulse.
RIKER: Make it quick!
(there is a major explosion on the Enterprise bridge)

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

LURSA: Target their bridge.
B'ETOR: Full disruptors.
KLINGON HELM: We are cloaking!
B'ETOR: What?
KLINGON HELM: Our shields are down!
(the Klingons watch as a single torpedo heads towards their Bird-of-Prey and destroys it)

[Enterprise-D bridge]

DATA: Yes! Mm!

[Veridian III mountaintop]

(Picard throws a stone at the forcefield)
SORAN: Haven't you got anything better to do?
(when Soran resumes his activities on the rocket, Picard spots a rock bridge. He throws a stone underneath it and doesn't trigger the forcefield)

[Enterprise engineering]

LAFORGE: It must have been that last torpedo. La Forge to bridge. I've got a problem down here. The magnetic interlocks have been ruptured. I...
(an explosion rocks engineering)
LAFORGE: Coolant leak! We have a coolant leak, everybody. Let's go. Let's get out of here. ...Everybody out! Let's move! ...Let's move! Let' go! Bridge, we have a new problem. We're five minutes from a warp core breach. There's nothing I can do.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

RIKER: Deanna, evacuate everyone to the saucer section. Mister Data, prepare to separate the ship.

[Enterprise-D corridors]

COMPUTER VOICE: Starship separation in five minutes. ...Starship separation in four minutes thirty-five seconds.

[Enterprise-D sickbay]

CRUSHER: Let's move him out. Let's go. Take him out. Quick.

[Enterprise-D Jeffries tube]

COMPUTER VOICE: Starship separation in four minutes thirty seconds.

[Enterprise-D corridor]

COMPUTER VOICE: Starship separation in four minutes fifteen seconds.
LAFORGE: Farrell!
FARRELL (OC): Yes.
LAFORGE: There's no one with these kids. Let's get them to the W-tube. We'll find the parents later.
COMPUTER VOICE: Starship separation in four minutes.

[Veridian III mountaintop]

SORAN: Now, you'll have to excuse me, Captain. I have an appointment with eternity and I don't want to be late.
(Picard moves to widen the aperture under the rock bridge)

[Enterprise-D Jeffries tube]

RIKER (OC): The core breach is accelerating. We've go to get out of here.
LAFORGE: That's it, bridge, ...we're all out!

[Enterprise-D bridge]

DATA: One minute to warp core breach.
RIKER: Begin separation sequence. Full impulse power once we're clear. Warp core is going critical.
DATA: Separation complete.
TROI: Engaging impulse engines.
DATA (OC): Core breach in progress.
COMPUTER VOICE: Primary stabilisers off-line. Engaging secondary systems.
RIKER: Report!
TROI: Helm controls are off-line!
DATA: Oh, shit...
(on the viewscreen Data has realised the saucer section is hurtling towards the planet)

[Veridian III mountaintop]

(as Soran climbs to the rocket Picard crawls under the rock bridge. Soran spots him and fires his phaser at him. Meanwhile the saucer section re-enters the planet's atmosphere)

[Enterprise-D bridge]

DATA: I have rerouted auxiliary power to the lateral thrusters. I'm attempting to level our descent.
RIKER: All hands, brace for impact!

[Enterprise-D crew quarters]

LAFORGE: Hold on there, tight. Hold on!

[Enterprise-D ready room]

CRUSHER: Hold their heads!

(the saucer section comes to rest after crashing through a forest)

[Enterprise-D bridge]

TROI: I'm okay.
(Riker looks up to see the sky through the shattered bridge dome)

[Veridian III mountaintop]

(as Soran goes to cross a scaffolding bridge he is confronted by Picard. They struggle and Picard succeeds in knocking Soran's phaser down off the bridge. The fight continues, Picard is knocked down and when Soran hears a rumble the rocket launches towards the sun. On impact the sky turns dark and they see the Nexus approaching)

[Nexus French living room]

(Picard is blindfolded)
PICARD: What... What is this? Where am I?
(the blindfold is removed to reveal a Christmas scene)
PICARD'S CHILDREN: Surprise!
MADISON PICARD: We love you father.
THOMAS PICARD: Were you scared?
MIMI PICARD: I helped decorate the tree.
OLIVIA PICARD: I helped decorate it. It took all day.
THOMAS PICARD: Say Merry Christmas, Papa.
OLIVIA PICARD: Seen your present?
MIMI PICARD: I love you, father.
PICARD: And I love you too.
ELISE PICARD: Move back and give your father some room. ...Cup of Earl Grey?
PICARD: That would be perfect, dear.
RENÉ PICARD: This one's for you.
PICARD: Oh, thank you very much, René.
RENÉ PICARD: Merry Christmas, uncle.
PICARD: And Merry Christmas to you too.
ELISE PICARD (OC): René, can you help me with the table?
PICARD: René! ...Come here. ...Go and help your aunt.
(Picard notices a spherical decoration blinking on the Christmas tree. It reminds him of the Veridian sun going out)
PICARD: This isn't right. ...This can't be real.
GUINAN (OC): It's as real as you want it to be.
PICARD: Guinan! ...What's going on? ...Why am I here?
GUINAN: You're in the Nexus.
PICARD: This is the Nexus?
GUINAN: For you. This is what you wanted.
PICARD: But ...I never had a home like this. ...Nor a wife and children. ...But these are all mine. ...Guinan, what are you doing here? ...I thought you were on board the Enterprise.
GUINAN: I am. ...I'm also here. ...Think of me as an echo of the person you know. ...A part of herself she left behind.
PICARD: When the Enterprise-B beamed you up from the Lakul?
THOMAS PICARD: Papa, help me build my castle.
PICARD: Yes I will, in a few minutes.
MIMI PICARD: Papa, thank you for the dolly. She's very beautiful.
PICARD: These are my children. ...These are my children!
GUINAN: Of course. Time has no meaning here. So you can go back and see them born, or go forward and see your grandchildren.
ELISE PICARD (OC): Dinner's ready everyone!
MATTHEW PICARD: Dinner's ready, Papa.
PICARD: Go on. Go on without me.
PICARD: Guinan, ...can I leave the Nexus?
GUINAN: Where would you go?
PICARD: I don't understand.
GUINAN: But as I said, time has no meaning here. So if you leave you can go anywhere, any time.
PICARD: All right, I know exactly where I want to go. The mountaintop on Veridian Three, just before Soran destroyed the star. I have to stop it. But I need help. Now, if you were to come back with me. Together, we c...
GUINAN: I can't leave here. I'm there already, remember? But I bet I know someone who can.

[Nexus Rockies farmyard]

(Kirk is chopping logs)
GUINAN (OC): And from his point of view, he just got there too.
PICARD: Kirk! ...James T. Kirk.
KIRK: Beautiful day.
PICARD: Yes, it certainly is.
KIRK: Would you mind?
PICARD: Oh.
(Picard places a log on the block)
PICARD: Captain, I'm wondering, do you realise?...
KIRK: Hold on a minute. Do you smell something burning?

[Nexus Rockies farmhouse kitchen]

KIRK: Looks like somebody was trying to cook some eggs. ...Come on in. It's all right, it's my house. ...At least it used to be, I sold it years ago.
PICARD: I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Starship ...Enterprise.
KIRK: The clock, ...I gave this clock to Bones.
PICARD: I'm from what you would consider the future, ...the twenty-fourth century.
(a dog barks in the doorway)
KIRK: Butler! ...Butler, how can you be here? ...He's been dead seven years.
ANTONIA (OC): Come on, Jim, I'm starving. How long have you been rattling around in that kitchen?
KIRK: Antonia! ...What are you talking about? ...The future? This is the past. ...This is nine years ago.
(Kirk gets a broken pair of spectacles out of a box)
KIRK: ...The day I told her I was going back to Starfleet.
KIRK: These are Ktarian eggs, ...It was her favourite. I was preparing them to soften the blow.
PICARD: I know how real this must seem to you, but it's not. This isn't really your house. We're both of us caught up in some kind of temporal nexus.
KIRK: Dill.
PICARD: I beg your pardon?
KIRK: Dill weed. ...In the cabinet, second shelf to the left, ...behind the oregano.
PICARD: How long have you been here?
KIRK: I don't know. I was aboard the Enterprise-B in the deflector control room... ...Stir these, will you?
(Kirk thrusts a hot frying pan into Picard's hands)
PICARD: Ow!
KIRK: The bulkhead in front of me disappeared. ...Then I found myself out here just now chopping wood, ...right before you walked up. Thanks.
PICARD: Look, ...history records that you died saving the Enterprise-B from an energy ribbon eighty years ago.
KIRK: You say this is the twenty-fourth century.
Picard: Aha.
KIRK: And I'm dead?
PICARD: Not exactly. As I said, this is some kind of...
KIRK/PICARD: Temporal nexus.
KIRK: ...Yeah, I heard you. ...Something is missing.
(the 'missing' two slices of toast pop up from the toaster)
PICARD: Captain, look! I need your help. I want you to leave the Nexus with me. ...We have to go back to a planet, Veridian Three. ...We have to stop a man called Soran from destroying a star. Millions of lives are at stake.
KIRK: You said history considers me dead. Who am I to argue with history?
PICARD: You are a Starfleet Officer. You have a duty...
KIRK: I don't need you to lecture me. I was out saving the galaxy when your grandfather was in diapers. Besides which, I think the galaxy owes me one. All right, ...I was like you once ...so completely blinded by duty and obligations that I couldn't see anything past this uniform. And in the end, what did it get me? An empty house. ...Not this time.
(Kirk purposefully climbs the stairs)
KIRK: This time I'm going to walk up these stairs, march into that bedroom ...and tell Antonia that I want to marry her. ...This time it's going to be different.
(Picard follows Kirk through the bedroom door into a barn)

[Nexus Idaho farm barn]

PICARD: This is not your bedroom.
KIRK: No, it's not. ...It's better!
PICARD: Better?
KIRK: This is my uncle's barn in Idaho. I took this horse out for a ride eleven years ago ...on a spring day, ...like this. If I'm right, this is the day I met Antonia. ...This Nexus of yours is very clever. I can start all over again ...and do things right from day one.
(Kirk mounts the horse and rides out. Picard goes to saddle another horse to follow him)

[Nexus Idaho countryside]

(Kirk jumps a ravine on the horse and back)
KIRK: I must have jumped that fifty times. Scared the hell out of me. Except this time. ...Because it isn't real.
(Kirk sees a woman on a horse on a distant hill)
PICARD (OC): Antonia?
KIRK: She isn't real either, is she? Nothing here is. ...Nothing here matters.
KIRK: You know, maybe this is less about an empty house than that empty chair on the bridge of the Enterprise. Ever since I left Starfleet I haven't made a difference. ...Captain of the Enterprise, huh?
PICARD: That's right.
KIRK: Close to retirement?
PICARD: I'm not planning on it.
KIRK: Let me tell you something. Don't! Don't let them promote you. Don't let them transfer you. Don't let them do anything that takes you off the bridge of that ship, because while you're there, you can make a difference.
PICARD: Come back with me. Help me stop Soran. Make a difference again.
KIRK: Who am I to argue with the Captain of the Enterprise? ...What's the name of that planet, ...Veridian Three?
PICARD: Yes.
KIRK: I take it the odds are against us, and the situation is grim?
PICARD: You could say that.
KIRK: You know if Spock were here, he'd say I was an irrational, illogical human being for taking on a mission like that. ...Sounds like fun.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

DATA: I have rerouted auxiliary power to the lateral thrusters. I'm attempting to level our descent.
RIKER: All hands, brace for impact!
(the Enterprise-D saucer section is crashing on the planet's surface)

[Veridian III mountaintop]

(Soran is on the scaffolding bridge and finds Kirk and Picard either side of him)
SORAN: Just who the hell are you?
PICARD: He's James T. Kirk. Don't you read history? ...I've got to get to the launcher. The ribbon will be here in a minute.
KIRK: I'll take care of Soran.
(Kirk goes to find Soran only to be confronted by him, phaser in hand)
SORAN: Actually I am familiar with history, Captain, and if I'm not too much mistaken, you're dead.
(Picard intervenes allowing Kirk to disarm Soran and a fight develops and Soran is left dangling on a rope)
KIRK: I thought you were heading for the launcher.
PICARD: I changed my mind. ...Captain's prerogative.
(Soran, still hanging from the rope, uses a padd to cloak the rocket launcher and then accidentally drops it. It lands onto the scaffolding bridge)
PICARD: We need that control padd. ...Captain, look! ...Where's Soran?
(Kirk heads for the bridge and Soran blasts it with his phaser leaving Kirk hanging on to it. Picard rescues Kirk)
PICARD: We're running out of time. ...Look! The control padd is still on the other side.
KIRK: I'll get it. You go for the launcher.
PICARD: No, you'll never make it by yourself. We've got to work together.
KIRK: We are working together. Trust me.
PICARD: Good luck, Captain.
KIRK: Call me, Jim.
(Kirk jumps to the other half of the broken bridge, retrieves the padd, decloaks the rocket launcher before the bridge breaks away and plunges downward with him on it)
SORAN: Picard! Get away from that launcher. ...Now!
(Soran gets to the launcher to find the warning message 'LOCKING CLAMPS ENGAGED'. As the rocket attempts to launch, it, together with Soran, is enveloped in an explosion. Picard scrambles down the mountainside to find Kirk lying under the wreckage of the bridge)
KIRK: Did we do it? ...Did we make a difference?
PICARD: Oh, yes, we made a difference. Thank you.
KIRK: It's the least I could do for the Captain of the Enterprise. ...It was ...fun. ...Oh my.
(Picard leaves his combadge on the cairn of stones over Kirk's body and then sees a shuttlecraft coming in to land)

Captain's log, stardate 48650.1. Three Starfleet vessels have arrived in orbit and have begun to beam up the Enterprise survivors. Our casualties are light but unfortunately the Enterprise herself cannot be salvaged.

[Enterprise-D cargo bay]

DATA: It has been extremely difficult, Counselor.
TROI: Then why did you decide not to remove the emotion chip?
DATA: At first I was unprepared for the unpredictable nature of the emotions. However having experienced two hundred and sixty-one distinct emotional states, I believe I have learned to control my feelings. They will no longer control me.
TROI: Well, I hope you're successful, Data. ...Data, over here, I've found something. ...One life sign, very faint.
DATA: Spot! ...I'm very happy to see you, Spot.
TROI: Another family reunited. ...Data, ...are you all right?
DATA: I am uncertain, Counselor. I am happy to see Spot, and yet I am crying. Perhaps the chip is malfunctioning?
TROI: I think it's working perfectly.
DATA: Hello, Spot.

[Enterprise-D ready room]

RIKER: Is this it?
PICARD: Yes, that's it, Number One. Thank you.
(Picard picks up his family photo-album)
RIKER: I'm going to miss this ship. She went before her time.
PICARD: Someone once told me that time is a predator that stalks us all our lives. I rather believe that time is a companion who goes with us on the journey, and reminds us to cherish every moment, ...because they'll never come again. ...What we leave behind is not as important as how we lived. ...After all, Number One, we're only mortal.
RIKER: Speak for yourself, sir. I plan to live forever.

[Enterprise-D bridge]

RIKER: I always thought I'd get a shot at this chair one day.
PICARD: You may still, Will. ...Somehow I doubt this will be the last ship to carry the name Enterprise. ... Picard to Farragut. Two to beam up.







OPENING CREDITS
(a huge explosion spreading out through space)
Stardate 9521.6, Captain's log, U.S.S. Excelsior. Hikaru Sulu commanding. After three years I've concluded my first assignment as master of this vessel, cataloguing gaseous planetary anomalies in the Beta Quadrant. We're heading home under full impulse power. I am pleased to report that ship and crew have functioned well.
[Excelsior bridge]

SULU: According to this we've completed our exploration of the entire sector.
(the ship begins to shudder and Sulu's teacup rattles off his table and breaks on the floor)
VALTANE: I have an energy wave from two hundred and forty degrees mark six port.
SULU: Visual! My ...God. ...Shields!
(an energy wave hits the ship throwing the crew about)
LOJUR (OC): Captain, she's not answering her helm.
SULU: Starboard thrusters. Turn her into the wave!
LOJUR: Aye.
SULU: Quarter impulse power! ...Damage report.
EXCELSIOR ENGINEER: Checking all systems, Captain.
SULU: Don't tell me that was any meteor shower.
VALTANE: Negative, sir. The subspace shockwave originated at bearing three two three, mark seven five. Location. It's Praxis, sir. It's a Klingon moon.
SULU: Praxis is their key energy production facility. ...Send to Klingon High Command. 'This is Excelsior, a Federation starship. We have monitored a large explosion in your sector. Do you require assistance?'
RAND: Aye sir.
SULU: Mister Valtane, any more data?
VALTANE: Yes sir. I have confirmed the location of Praxis, sir, but...
SULU: What is it?
VALTANE: I cannot confirm the existence of Praxis.
SULU: On screen! ...Magnify!
COMPUTER VOICE: Computer enhancement.
SULU: Praxis?
VALTANE: What's left of it, sir.
RAND: Captain, I'm getting a message from Praxis.
SULU: Let's have it.
KERLA (on viewscreen): This is Brigadier Kerla, speaking for the High Command. There has been an incident on Praxis. However everything is under control. We have no need for assistance. Obey treaty stipulations and remain outside the Neutral Zone. This transmission ends now.
SULU: An incident?
RAND: Do we report this, sir?
SULU: Are you kidding?
[Starfleet briefing room]

KIRK: What are we doing here?
McCOY: Maybe they're throwing us a retirement party.
SCOTT: That suits me. I've just bought a boat.
UHURA: This had better be good. I'm supposed to be chairing a seminar at the Academy.
CHEKOV: Isn't this just for top brass?
KIRK: If we're all here, where's Sulu?
McCoy: Captain Sulu. ...On assignment.
KIRK: Where's Spock?
AIDE-DE-CAMP: This briefing is classified. Ladies and Gentlemen, the C-in-C.
C in C: As you were. I'll break this information down succinctly. The Klingon Empire has roughly fifty years of life left. ...For full details, I am turning this briefing over to Federation Special Envoy.
SPOCK: Good morning. Two months ago a Federation starship monitored an explosion on the Klingon moon Praxis. We believe it was caused by over-mining and insufficient safety precautions. The moon's decimation means a deadly pollution of their ozone. They will have depleted their supply of oxygen in approximately fifty Earth years. Due to their enormous military budget, the Klingon economy does not have the resources to combat this catastrophe. Last month, at the behest of the Vulcan Ambassador I opened a dialogue with Gorkon, Chancellor of the Klingon High Council. He proposes to commence negotiations at once.
CARTWRIGHT: Negotiations for what?
SPOCK: The dismantling of our space stations and starbases along the Neutral Zone, an end to almost seventy years of unremitting hostility with the Klingons, which the Klingons can no longer afford.
MILITARY AIDE: Bill, are we talking about mothballing the Starfleet?
C in C: I'm sure that our exploration and scientific programs would be unaffected, Captain, but...
CARTWRIGHT: I must protest. To offer the Klingons a safe haven within Federation space is suicide. Klingons would become the alien trash of the galaxy. And if we dismantle the fleet, we'd be defenceless before an aggressive species with a foothold on our territory. The opportunity here is to bring them to their knees. Then we'll be in a far better position to dictate terms.
KIRK: Sir!
C in C: Captain Kirk?
KIRK: The Klingons have never been trustworthy. I'm forced to agree with Admiral Cartwright. This is a terrifying idea.
SPOCK: It is imperative that we act now to support the Gorkon initiative, lest more conservative elements persuade his Empire that it is better to attempt a military solution and die fighting.
C in C: You, Captain Kirk, you are to be our first olive branch.
SPOCK: We have volunteered to rendezvous with the Klingon vessel that is bringing Chancellor Gorkon to Earth, and to escort him safely through Federation space.
KIRK: Me?
C in C: Well, there are Klingons who feel the same way about the peace treaty as yourself and Admiral Cartwright. But they'll think twice about attacking the Enterprise under your command.
SPOCK: I have personally vouched for you in this matter, Captain.
KIRK: You ...have personally ...vouched?
C in C: You will extend Chancellor Gorkon full diplomatic courtesy, Captain.
KIRK: But a full Ambassador would be better equipped...
C in C: If there's no further business ...I wish you and your crew Godspeed. Thank you ladies and gentlemen. ...I remind you this meeting is classified.
CARTWRIGHT: I don't know whether to congratulate you or not, Jim.
McCOY: I wouldn't!
KIRK: We volunteered?
SPOCK: There's an old Vulcan proverb. 'Only Nixon could go to China.'
KIRK: How could you vouch for me? That's ...arrogant presumption.
SPOCK: My father requested that I open negotia...
KIRK: I know your father's the Vulcan Ambassador for heaven's sake, but you know how I feel about this. They're animals!
SPOCK: Jim, there is an historic opportunity here.
KIRK: Don't believe them! Don't trust them!
SPOCK: They're dying.
KIRK: Let them die! ...Has it occurred to you that this crew is due to stand down in three months? We've done our bit for King and Country. ...You should have trusted me.
[Spacedock - shuttlecraft approaching]

SHUTTLECRAFT VOICE: Control, this is SD one zero three approaching Spacedock.
SPACEDOCK VOICE: SD one zero three, you are clear to deliver Captain Kirk and party to NCC one seven zero one alpha. Over.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

VALERIS: Captain on the bridge.
KIRK: As you were. ...Lieutenant?
VALERIS: Valeris, sir. We were told that you needed a helmsman so I volunteered.
SPOCK: Lieutenant, It is agreeable to see you again. The Lieutenant was the first Vulcan to be graduated at the top of the class at the Academy.
KIRK: You must be very proud.
VALERIS: I don't believe so, sir.
McCOY: She's a Vulcan all right.
KIRK: Let's get this over with. Departure stations. ...Scotty?
SCOTT (OC): Aye sir?
KIRK: Did you find the engine room?
SCOTT (OC): Right where I left it, sir.
KIRK: Standby. Uhura, get me the dock master.
UHURA: Control tower, reading, sir.
KIRK: Control, this is Enterprise ...requesting permission to depart.
SPACEDOCK VOICE: This is control. Enterprise, Permission to depart granted. ...Thirty seconds for port gates.
VALERIS: Clear all moorings.
KIRK: Awaiting port gates from this mark.
SPACEDOCK VOICE: All lines cleared.
VALERIS: Aft thrusters.
KIRK: Thank you. Lieutenant, one-quarter impulse power.
VALERIS: Captain, may I remind you that regulations specify thrusters only while in Spacedock?
SPOCK: Hm. Hm.
McCOY (OC): Jim?
KIRK: You heard the order, Lieutenant.
VALERIS: Aye sir.
Captain's log, stardate 9522.6. I've never trusted Klingons, and I never will.
[Kirk's quarters]

Captain's log. (continued) I can never forgive them for the death of my boy. To me our mission to escort the Chancellor of the Klingon High Council to a peace summit ...is problematic, at best. Spock says this could be an historic occasion, and I'd like to believe him. But how on earth can history get past people like me?
VALERIS: Hm! ...Sir.
KIRK: You could have knocked.
VALERIS: We are almost at the rendezvous, sir. I thought that you would like to know.
KIRK: Right.
VALERIS: Permission to speak freely, sir? ...It is an honour to serve with you.
KIRK: You piloted well out of Spacedock, Lieutenant.
VALERIS: I always wanted to try that.
[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: You've done well, Valeris. As your sponsor at the Academy I've followed your career with satisfaction. And as a Vulcan, you have exceeded my expectations.
VALERIS: I do not understand this representation.
(referring to a painting on the wall)
SPOCK: It's a depiction from ancient Earth mythology. 'The Expulsion from Paradise.'
VALERIS: Why keep it in your quarters?
SPOCK: To be a reminder to me that all things end.
VALERIS: It is of endings that I wish to speak. Sir, I address you as a kindred intellect. Do you not recognise ...that a turning point has been reached in the affairs of the Federation?
SPOCK: History is replete with turning points, Lieutenant. You must have faith.
VALERIS: Faith?
SPOCK: That the universe will unfold as it should.
VALERIS: But is this logical? Surely we must...
SPOCK: Logic? ...Logic is the beginning of wisdom, Valeris, not the end. ...This will be my final voyage on board this vessel as a member of her crew. Nature abhors a vacuum. I intend you to replace me.
VALERIS: I could only succeed you, sir.
UHURA (on intercom): Now hear this. All officers to the bridge. Klingon battle cruiser off the port bow. All officers to the bridge.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

VOICE (OC): Captain on the bridge.
CHEKOV: Shall we raise our shields, Captain?
KIRK: I've never been this close.
SPOCK: The Chancellor is undoubtedly awaiting our signal.
KIRK: Uhura, hailing frequencies.
UHURA: Aye sir.
KIRK: Right standard rudder, bring us alongside.
VALERIS: Right standard rudder, Z plus five degrees.
UHURA: Channel is open, Captain.
KIRK: This is the Starship Enterprise, Captain James T. Kirk commanding.
GORKON (on viewscreen): This is Kronos One. I am Chancellor Gorkon.
KIRK: Chancellor. We've been ordered to escort you through Federation space to your meeting on Earth.
GORKON (on viewscreen): Thank you, Captain.
KIRK: Would you and your party care to dine this evening aboard the Enterprise with my officers as guests of the United Federation of Planets?
GORKON (on viewscreen): We would be delighted to accept your gracious invitation.
KIRK: We'll make arrangements to have you beamed aboard at nineteen thirty hours.
GORKON (on viewscreen): I shall look forward to that.
KIRK: I hope you're happy.
VALERIS: Captain, there is a supply of Romulan ale aboard. It might make the evening pass more ...smoothly?
KIRK: Officer thinking, Lieutenant.
CHEKOV: Guess who is coming to dinner?
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

KIRK: Energise.
(a crewman blows traditional bo'sun's pipe call)
KIRK: Chancellor Gorkon.
GORKON: Captain Kirk.
KIRK: May I present Captain Spock, whom I believe you know.
GORKON: Captain, face to face at last. ...You have my thanks.
SPOCK: Chancellor.
GORKON: Gentlemen, this is my daughter Azetbur, ...my military advisor Brigadier Kerla, ...and this is General Chang my chief of staff.
CHANG: I've always wanted to meet you, Captain.
KIRK: I'm not sure how to take that.
KERLA: Sincere admiration, Kirk,...
CHANG: ...from one warrior to another.
KIRK: Right. ...This way. I think you might enjoy a brief tour.
CREWMAN #1: They all look alike.
CREWMAN #2: What about that smell? You know only the top of the line models can even talk and...
VALERIS: You men have work?
CREWMAN #1/#2: Yes, ma'am.
VALERIS: Then snap to it.
[Enterprise-A officer's mess]

GORKON: I offer a toast. ...The undiscovered country, ...the future.
ALL: The undiscovered country.
SPOCK: Hamlet, act three, scene one.
GORKON: You have not experienced Shakespeare until you have read him in the original Klingon.
CHANG: (in Klingonese) 'To be or not to be.'
KERLA: Captain Kirk, I thought Romulan ale was illegal.
KIRK: One of the advantages of being a thousand light years from Federation headquarters.
McCOY: To you, Chancellor Gorkon, one of the architects of our future.
ALL: Chancellor!
SCOTT: Perhaps we are looking at something of that future here.
CHANG: Tell me, Captain Kirk, would you be willing to give up Starfleet?
SPOCK: I believe the Captain feels that Starfleet's mission has always been one of peace.
CHANG: Ah.
KIRK: Far be it for me to dispute my first officer. Starfleet has always been...
CHANG: Come now, Captain, there's no need to mince words. In space, all warriors are cold warriors.
UHURA: Er. General, are you fond of ...Shakes ....peare?
CHEKOV: We do believe all planets have a sovereign claim to inalienable human rights.
AZETBUR: Inalien... If only you could hear yourselves? 'Human rights.' Why the very name is racist. The Federation is no more than a 'homo sapiens' only club.
CHANG: Present company excepted, of course.
KERLA: In any case, we know where this is leading. The annihilation of our culture.
McCOY: That's not true!
KERLA: No!
McCOY: No!
CHANG: 'To be, or not to be!', that is the question which preoccupies our people, Captain Kirk. ...We need breathing room.
KIRK: Earth, Hitler, nineteen thirty-eight.
CHANG: I beg your pardon?
GORKON: Well, ...I see we have a long way to go.
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

KIRK: We must do this again, sometime.
GORKON: You don't trust me, do you? ...I don't blame you. ...If there is to be a Brave New World, our generation is going to have the hardest time living in it. ...Captain Spock.
SPOCK: Chancellor. ...Madam.
AZETBUR: Captain,
CHANG: Well, most kind. 'Parting is such sweet sorrow,' Hm, Captain. 'Have we not heard the chimes at midnight?'
CHANG: (in Klingonese) Energise.
SCOTT: Thank God.
UHURA: Did you see the way they ate?
CHEKOV: Terrible table manners.
SPOCK: I doubt that our own behaviour will distinguish us in the annals of diplomacy.
KIRK: I'm going to sleep it off. Please let me know if there's some other way we can screw up tonight.
McCOY: I'm going to find a pot of black coffee.
[Kirk's quarters]

Captain's log. The Enterprise hosted Chancellor Gorkon and company to dinner last night. Our manners weren't exactly Emily Post. Note to the galley. Romulan ale no longer to be served at diplomatic functions.
SPOCK (on intercom): Captain Kirk. Will you please join me on the bridge? Captain Kirk?
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SPOCK: Ah, Captain.
KIRK: What is it?
SPOCK: I find this curious.
KIRK: Spock, I'm really tired.
SPOCK: We are reading an enormous amount of neutron radiation.
KIRK: Where?
SPOCK: Strangely enough it appears to be emanating from us.
KIRK: The Enterprise?
KIRK: Valeris, do you know anything about a radiation surge?
VALERIS: Sir?
KIRK: Chekov?
CHEKOV: Only the size of my head!
KIRK: I know what you mean. (on the viewscreen a photon torpedo hits the Klingon battle cruiser)
KIRK: What's happened?
SPOCK: We have fired on the Chancellor's ship.
CHEKOV: Torpedo room! Please confirm. Have we fired?
KIRK: Uhura, monitor!
UHURA (OC): Aye sir.
VALERIS: Direct hit!
UHURA: Confirmed, sir.
(a second photon torpedo shoots out and the Klingon ship loses gravity)
[Gorkon's stateroom]

KERLA (OC): We've lost gravity.
STEX: We are betrayed!
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

KIRK (on intercom): This is the bridge. Do you read me? Do you read me?
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Torpedo bay! Did we fire those torpedoes?
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

SCOTT: Negative, Captain. According to Inventory we're still fully loaded.
[Kronos One transporter room]

(two 'hit-men' in Starfleet environmental suits and wearing gravity boot beam aboard and shoot the Klingon transporter officer)
[Gorkon's stateroom]

GORKON: (in Klingonese) Find Chang!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: Unable to confirm or deny firing the two photon torpedoes.
KIRK (OC): Hailing frequencies.
UHURA: Aye sir.
[Kronos One corridors]

UHURA (OC): Kronos One, this is Enterprise. Do you read? Over.
(the 'hit-men' shoot two more Klingons and third severing his arm. Pink Klingon blood floats in the gravity free environment)
[Gorkon's stateroom]

(the 'hit-men' shoot a fourth Klingon before targeting Gorkon)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: It's very hard to make out, sir. There's been some weapons firing and a lot of shouting.
CHEKOV (OC): She's still listing.
KIRK: She's spinning out of control.
[Kronos One transporter room]

(the 'hit-men' transport out together with some Klingon blood)
KLINGON VOICE: (in Klingonese) Restoring auxiliary gravity.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHANG (on viewscreen): Have you not a shred of decency ...in you, Kirk? We come in peace and you blatantly defy that peace. For that I shall blow you out of the stars.
KIRK: We haven't fired.
SPOCK: Captain, according to our data banks, we have. ...Twice.
VALERIS: Captain, they're coming about!
SPOCK: They're preparing to fire.
CHEKOV (OC): Shields up, Captain?
VALERIS: Captain, our shields!
CHEKOV: Shields up, Captain?
KIRK: Signal our surrender.
UHURA: Captain?
KIRK: We surrender!
UHURA: This is Enterprise.
CHEKOV: If they fire...
UHURA: We surrender.
CHEKOV: ...with our shields down...
UHURA: We surrender.
CHEKOV: ...we will not be able to respond.
UHURA (OC): Repeat, Enterprise surrenders.
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

McCOY: Are we firing torpedoes?
KIRK: I wish I knew.
McCOY (OC): Well it sure looks like it.
KIRK: I'm going aboard. Spock, you have the conn.
SPOCK: I am responsible for involving you in this. I will go.
KIRK: No, I'll go. You'll be responsible for getting me out of this. We'll not be the instigators of a full-scale war on the eve of universal peace.
McCOY: I'm going too. They may need a doctor.
SPOCK: Perhaps you're right.
KIRK: Uhura, tell them we're coming. And tell them we're unarmed.
UHURA (OC): Aye sir.
[Kronos One transporter room]

KERLA: Have you lost your mind?
KIRK: I give you my word I don't understand what's happened.
McCOY (OC): We're here to help.
KERLA: Follow me.
[Gorkon's stateroom]

McCOY: Chancellor Gorkon!
KIRK: My God, what has happened here?
CHANG: You dare to feign ignorance?
KIRK: What happened?
CHANG: With a direct torpedo hit you crippled our entire gravitational field, and two of your Starfleet crew beamed aboard wearing magnetic boots and did this.
McCOY: Aren't you carrying a surgeon?
CHANG: We were until this disgrace.
McCOY: Then for God's sake, man, let me help. ...I've got a pulse. We can move him. ...I'm gonna need some light. Can we get him on the table? ...Hold him! Hold him, while I stabilise him. ...I said hold him! ...Sweet Jesus!
KIRK: Can you?...
McCOY: Jim, I don't even know his anatomy. ...His wounds are not closing.
KERLA: He's killing him!
McCOY: He's gone into some kind of damned arrest. ...Come on, dammit! Come on. ...He's not responding.
GORKON: Don't let it end this way, Captain.
CHANG: Under article number one hundred and eighty-four of your Interstellar Law, ...I'm placing you under arrest. You are charged with assassinating the Chancellor of the High Council.
KIRK: He tried to save him!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: They've been arrested.
CHEKOV: Mister Spock, we've got to do something!
SPOCK: I assume command of this ship as of zero two thirty hours. Commander Uhura, please notify Starfleet Headquarters. Tell them precisely what has taken place, and request instructions.
UHURA: Aye sir.
VALERIS: But we cannot allow them to be taken back to Kronos as prisoners.
SPOCK: What do you suggest, Lieutenant? Opening fire will not retrieve them, and an armed combat is precisely what the Captain wished to avoid. We will be able to follow the Captain's movements.
VALERIS: How did you achieve this, sir?
SPOCK: Time is precious, Lieutenant. We must endeavour to piece together what happened here tonight. According to our data bank, this ship fired those torpedoes.
SCOTT: No way!
SPOCK: I sympathise, Mister Scott, but we need evidence. Please accompany me.
CHEKOV: And if we cannot piece together what happened? What then?
SPOCK: In that case, Mister Chekov, it resides in the purview of the diplomats.
[Federation President's office]

KLINGON AMBASSADOR: The Chancellor of the Klingon High Council is dead! The result of an unprovoked attack while he travelled to see you under a flag of truce on a mission of peace. Captain Kirk was legally arrested for the crime. May I remind you that he and Doctor McCoy boarded Kronos One of their own free will. None of these facts are in dispute, Mister President.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: I have ordered a full-scale investigation. In the meantime...
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: In the meantime we expect the Federation to abide by the articles of Interstellar Law, which you claim to cherish. Kirk and Doctor McCoy will stand trial for the assassination of Chancellor Gorkon.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Out of the question. Ambassador Sarek, there must be some way to extradite these men.
SAREK: Mister President, I share a measure of personal responsibility in this matter, but I am obliged to confirm my esteemed colleagues legal interpretation.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: And what is the position of the Romulan government, Ambassador Nanclus?
NANCLUS: I must concur with my colleagues.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: You cannot possibly believe that James Kirk assassinated the Chancellor of the High Council.
NANCLUS: Mister President, I don't know what to believe.
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: I am waiting for your answer, sir.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: This President is not above the law.
SECRETARY (on intercom): Mister President, Starfleet Command is here from San Francisco.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Send them in.
C in C: Mister President.
CARTWRIGHT: Mister President.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Bill, ...Admiral Cartwright, Please, please sit down.
CARTWRIGHT: Mister President we cannot allow Federation citizens to be abducted.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Yes, yes Admiral, but I am constrained to observe Interstellar Law.
C in C: Sir, would you please take a look at this. ...Colonel West.
WEST: We've prepared Operation Retrieve based on the rising danger of terrorism between the Klingon Empire and Federation. Sir, we can go in, rescue the hostages and get out in twenty-four hours with an acceptable rate of loss in manpower and equipment. We have the technology to...
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Yes, yes. But suppose you precipitate a full-scale war?
WEST: Then, quite frankly, Mister President we can clean their chronometers.
NANCLUS: Mister President, they are vulnerable. There will never be a better time.
CARTWRIGHT: The longer we wait, the less accessible the hostages will be, sir.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Thank you, Admiral. I'll bear that in mind. Thank you, gentlemen. I believe that's all for now.
CARTWRIGHT: Mister President.
C in C: Sir. ...Those men have literally saved this planet.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Yes, Bill, I know that. And now they're going to save it again. ...By standing trial.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

STARFLEET VOICE: Report back, on the double. Do you read?
UHURA: We're to report back at once.
CHEKOV: We cannot abandon Captain Kirk and Doctor McCoy.
UHURA: Of course not.
VALERIS: Four hundred years ago on the planet Earth, workers who felt their livelihood threatened by automation, flung their wooden shoes, called 'sabots' into the machines to stop them. ...Hence the word 'sabotage'.
UHURA: We are experiencing technical malfunction. All backup systems inoperative.
CHEKOV: Excellent. I... I mean, ...too bad.
[Federation President's office]

AZETBUR (on viewscreen): Mister President, I have been named Chancellor of the High Council in my father's place.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Madam Chancellor, you have my sincerest condolences on your recent loss. I want to assure you that this shameful deed will not....
AZETBUR (on viewscreen): Mister President, let us come to the point. You want the conference to go forward and so did my father. I will attend in one week, on one condition. We will not extradite the prisoners and you will make no attempt to rescue them in a military operation. We would consider any such attempt an act of war.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: We hope you'll be our guest here on Earth.
AZETBUR (on viewscreen): After recent events you will understand if I say I prefer a neutral site. And in the interests of security, let us keep the location secret for now.
[Azetbur's office]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT (on viewscreen): As you wish, Madam Chancellor.
KERLA: (in Klingonese) Attack them now! While we still can.
KLINGON GENERAL #1: (in Klingonese) Attack or be slaves in their world!
KERLA: (in Klingonese) We can take them by force.
STEX: (in Klingonese) What they propose to divide.
AZETBUR: (in Klingonese) War is obsolete, General. As we are in danger of becoming.
CHANG: (in Klingonese) Better to die on our feet than live on our knees.
AZETBUR: (in Klingonese) That wasn't what my father wanted.
CHANG: Your father was killed for what he wanted.
AZETBUR: The peace process will go forward. ...Kirk. Kirk will pay for my father's death.
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

SCOTT (OC): It's as I said, Mister Spock. Inventory registers every torpedo.
SPOCK: Yet the data banks insist we fired. One computer is lying.
SCOTT: A computer doesn't lie.
SPOCK: Precisely, Mister Scott. Therefore we must inspect each torpedo, ...visually.
SCOTT: That could take hours!
SPOCK: Nevertheless.
SCOTT: And if they're all there?
SPOCK: Then someone forged an entry in the data bank entry in the data banks.
VALERIS: Gorkon's daughter has been named Chancellor. It was on the news.
SCOTT: I'll bet that Klingon bitch killed her father.
SPOCK: Her own father?
VALERIS: It is an old story, sir.
SCOTT: They don't place the same value on life that we do, Spock, you know that. ...Take my word. She did not shed one bloody tear.
SPOCK: Hardly conclusive, Mister Scott, as Klingons have no tear-ducts. Lieutenant, any response from Starfleet since our dispatch?
VALERIS: Yes sir.
SPOCK: And?
VALERIS: Commander Uhura is experiencing technical difficulties, sir.
SPOCK: Curious. Very well. For twenty-four hours we'll agree this conversation did not take place.
VALERIS: A lie?
SPOCK: An omission.
SCOTT: But in twenty-four hours we won't have a clue where the Captain Kirk is.
SPOCK: I know precisely where he will be.
SCOTT: You do? Where?
[Klingon courtroom]

KLINGONS: Kirk, Kirk, Kirk, Kirk...
[Federation President's office]

CARTWRIGHT: It's a damned show trial.
[Klingon courtroom]

CHANG: (in Klingonese) (translated)
KLINGON TRANSLATOR (OC): The Enterprise fired on Kronos One without provocation. The Chancellor and his advisors...
CHANG: ...having been lulled into a false sense of security by an invitation to a state dinner aboard Captain Kirk's vessel...
CHANG (OC): ...at precisely nineteen thirty hours that same evening.
KLINGON JUDGE: Call your first witness.
KLINGON OFFICER: After the first shot we lost our gravitational field. I found myself weightless and unable to function.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KLINGON OFFICER (on viewscreen): Then two Starfleet crewmen came walking towards me.
COLONEL WORF (on viewscreen): Or perhaps they merely wore Starfleet uniforms.
CHANG (on viewscreen): That remark is purely speculative. I move that it be stricken.
KLINGON JUDGE (on viewscreen): Colonel Worf, we are interested in facts, not theories.
[Klingon courtroom]

KLINGON TRANSLATOR (OC): If the gravitational field was not functioning...
COLONEL WORF (on viewscreen): ...how could these men be walking?
KLINGON OFFICER: They appeared to be wearing magnetic boots.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SPOCK: Gravity boots.
CHANG (on viewscreen): Doctor McCoy, would you be so good as to tell me your current medical status?
McCOY (on viewscreen): Aside from a touch of arthritis, I'd say pretty good.
CHANG (on viewscreen): You have a singular wit, Doctor.
McCOY (on viewscreen): For twenty-seven years I have been ship's Surgeon aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise. In three months I stand down.
CHANG (on viewscreen): Ah. You know. I believe that you consumed a rather generous amount of Romulan ale in the officers' mess on the night of question. Am I right, Doctor?
COLONEL WORF (on viewscreen): Objection!
KLINGON JUDGE (on viewscreen): Sustained.
McCOY (on viewscreen): We all did. All of us. That doesn't mean...
CHANG (on viewscreen): Was Chancellor Gorkon alive when you first examined him?
McCOY (on viewscreen): Barely.
CHANG (on viewscreen): Now be careful, Doctor. Have you ever, in your past, ...saved patients as 'barely' alive as he?
McCOY (on viewscreen): I didn't have the medical knowledge I needed for Klingon anatomy.
CHANG (on viewscreen): I see.
McCOY (on viewscreen): You were there.
CHANG (on viewscreen): You say you are due for retirement. May I ask, do your hands shake?
COLONEL WORF (on viewscreen): Objection!
McCOY (on viewscreen): I was nervous.
CHANG (on viewscreen): No. You were incompetent!
[Klingon courtroom]

CHANG: You were incompetent, whether deliberately or as a result of age combined with drink. The court will have to determine.
McCOY: My God, man, I tried to save him! I tried to save him. I was desperate to save him! He was the last best hope in the universe for peace.
KLINGON JUDGE (OC): The witness is excused.
CHANG: There we have it, citizens. We have finally established the particulars of the crime. And now we come to the architect of this tragic affair. ...James ...Tiberius ...Kirk. What would your favourite author say, Captain? 'Let us sit upon the ground and tell sad stories of the death of kings' Tell us your sad story, Kirk. Tell us that you planned to take revenge for the death of your son.
KIRK: That's not true!
COLONEL WORF: Objection! Captain Kirk has not been identified as the assassin.
KLINGON JUDGE (OC): Sustained.
CHANG: I offer into the record this excerpt from the Captain's personal log.
KIRK (recording): I've never trusted Klingons and I never will. I've never been able to forgive them for the death of my boy.
KLINGONS: (in Klingonese) Again! Again.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK (OC) (recording): I've never trusted Klingons and I never will.
[Federation President's office]

KIRK (on viewscreen): I've never been able to forgive them for the death of my boy.
[Klingon courtroom]

CHANG: Are those your words?
KIRK: Those words were spoken by me.
COLONEL WORF: Objection! My client's political views are not on trial.
CHANG: On the contrary, Captain Kirk's views and motives are, indeed, at the very heart of the matter. This officer's record shows him to be an insubordinate, unprincipled, career-minded opportunist with a history of violating the chain of command whenever it suited him.
KLINGON JUDGE: Continue.
CHANG: Indeed the record shows that Captain Kirk once held the rank of Admiral and that Admiral Kirk was broken for taking matters into his own hands in defiance of regulations and the law. Do you deny you were demoted for these charges, Captain? Don't wait for the translation. Answer me now!
KIRK: I cannot deny it.
CHANG: You were demoted.
KIRK: Yes.
CHANG: For insubordination.
KIRK: On occasion, I have disobeyed orders.
CHANG: And were you obeying or disobeying orders when you arranged the assassination of Chancellor Gorkon?
KIRK: I didn't know about the assassination until we boarded the ship!
CHANG: You still deny the Enterprise fired on Kronos One?
KIRK: Well...
COLONEL WORF: Your honour, please...
CHANG: And you still deny your men beamed aboard and shot the Chancellor?
COLONEL WORF (OC): Objection!
KIRK: I cannot confirm or deny actions I did not witness.
CHANG: Captain Kirk, are you aware that as the Captain of a starship you are required to be responsible for the actions of your men?
KIRK: I am.
CHANG: And if it should be proved that members of your crew did in fact carry out such an assassination?...
McCOY: Jim! They're setting us up! Your honours!...
COLONEL WORF: Do not answer!
KLINGON JUDGE: Captain Kirk, you will answer the question.
KIRK: As Captain ...I am responsible for the conduct of the crew under my command.
CHANG: Your honours, the State rests.
[Excelsior bridge]

SULU: Send to Commander Enterprise. 'We stand ready to assist you. Captain Sulu, U.S.S. Excelsior.'
[Klingon courtroom]

KLINGON JUDGE: It is the determination of this court that the prisoners are guilty as charged.
COLONEL WORF: I wish to note, for the record, that the evidence against my client is entirely circumstantial. I beg the court to consider this when pronouncing its sentence.
KLINGON JUDGE: So noted. Captain James T. Kirk, Doctor Leonard McCoy. In the interests of fostering amity for the forthcoming peace talks, the sentence of death is commuted. ...It is the judgment of this court that without possibility of reprieve or parole, you be taken from this place to the dilithium mines on the penal asteroid of Rura Penthe, there to spend the rest of your natural lives.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: Rura Penthe!
CHEKOV: Known throughout the galaxy as the alien's graveyard.
SCOTT: Better to kill them now and get it over with.
SPOCK: Lieutenant. The torpedo hit ...once again, please. ...Hold!
CHEKOV: It is Enterprise. We fired.
SCOTT: That is not possible! All weapons visually accounted for, sir.
SPOCK: An ancestor of mine maintained that if you eliminate the impossible whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
UHURA: What exactly does that mean?
SPOCK: It means that if we cannot have fired those torpedoes, someone else did.
SCOTT: Well they dinna fire on themselves. There were no other ships present.
SPOCK: There was an enormous neutron energy surge.
SCOTT: Not from us!
CHEKOV: A neutron surge that big could only be produced by another ship.
UHURA: Kronos One?
SPOCK: Too far away. Very near us. Possibly beneath us.
SCOTT: If there were a ship beneath us the Klingons would have seen it.
SPOCK: Would they?
VALERIS: A Bird-of-Prey?
SPOCK: A Bird-of-Prey.
CHEKOV: Cloaked?
SCOTT: A Bird-of-Prey canna fire when she's cloaked!
SPOCK: All things being equal, Mister Scott, I would agree. However things are not equal. This one can.
VALERIS: We must inform Starfleet Command.
SCOTT: Inform them of what? A new weapon that is invisible? Raving lunatics, that's what they'll call us! They'll say that we're so desperate to exonerate the Captain that we'll say anything.
SPOCK: And they would be correct. We have no evidence. Only a theory, which happens to fit the facts.
UHURA: Assuming you're right, Mister Spock, why would they fire on their own President?
SPOCK: Indeed. This ship will be searched from bow to stern. Lieutenant Valeris, you'll be in charge.
VALERIS: Aye sir.
CHEKOV: I do not understand. If there was a ship underneath us, surely the assassins beamed aboard from that wessel, not Enterprise.
SPOCK: You're forgetting something, Mister Chekov. According to our data banks this ship fired those torpedoes. If we did, the killers are here, if we did not, whoever altered the data banks is here. In either case, what we are looking for is here.
CHEKOV: What are we looking for, sir?
SPOCK: Lieutenant?
VALERIS: Two pairs of gravity boots.
[Rura Penthe ice-desert]

KLINGON COMMANDANT: This is the gulag Rura Penthe. There is no stockade, no guard tower, no electronic frontier. Only a magnetic shield prevents beaming. Punishment means exile from prison to the surface. On the surface, nothing can survive. ...Work well and you will be treated well. Work badly and you will die.
[Rura Penthe mine]

KIRK: Oh my God!
(a huge alien accosts Kirk)
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Quog wok na pushnat.
KIRK: Er, The, er, ...universal translator has been confiscated.
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Ring notsa loskent!
KIRK: I'm sorry.
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Rangnit ascru, unto pram shondik!
McCOY: He's definitely on about something, Jim.
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Quog wok na pushnat!
(the alien picks Kirk up)
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Quog wok na pushnat!
KIRK: If this is your spot, we'll move on.
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Quog wok na pushnat!
MARTIA: He wants your obedience to the Brotherhood of Aliens.
KIRK: He's got it.
MARTIA: And your coat.
KIRK: I'm afraid not. Besides it wouldn't fit.
BEHEMOTH ALIEN: Quog wok na pushnat!
MARTIA: Krandog aranty. ...Krandog! Krandog aranty.
(the alien puts Kirk down)
MARTIA: Fendo pompsky.
KIRK (OC): Thanks.
MARTIA: This will help keep you warm. I'm Martia. You're Kirk and McCoy.
KIRK: How did you know that?
MARTIA: We don't get many presidential assassins.
KIRK: We didn't kill Gorkon.
MARTIA: Of course not. But there is a reward for your death.
McCOY: That figures.
KIRK: We've been set up all along.
MARTIA: Somebody up there wants you out of the way.
[Enterprise-A galley]

SPOCK: Any progress?
VALERIS: None. We have got a crew of three hundred turning their own quarters inside out, but the killers may still be among them. Surely they have disposed of these boots by now. Would it not have been logical to have left them on Gorkon's ship?
SPOCK: Even logic must give way to physics. Gravity had not been restored by the time they escaped. Without the boots they would have floated off the Klingon transporter pads.
CHEKOV: Why not simply vaporise them?
VALERIS: Like this?
KLAXON: Wails.
VALERIS: At ease. As you know, Commander Chekov, no one can fire an unauthorised phaser aboard a starship. ...Suppose when they returned they threw the boots into the refuse?
SPOCK: I'm having the refuse searched. If my surmise is correct those boots will cling to the killers' necks like a pair of Tiberian bats. They could not make their escape without them, nor can they simply throw them out a window for all to see. Those boots are here, somewhere.
UHURA: Did someone fire a phaser?
CHEKOV: It's all right. It's nothing.
UHURA: Mister Spock, Starfleet is screaming for us to return to port.
SCOTT: Who fired tha...
SPOCK: Ah! Mister Scott, I understand you're having difficulty with the warp drive. How much time do you require for repair?
SCOTT: There's nothing wrong with the bloody thing.
SPOCK: Mister Scott. If we return to Spacedock, the assassins would surely find away to dispose of their incriminating footwear and we will never see the Captain and Doctor McCoy alive again.
SCOTT: It could take weeks, sir.
SPOCK: Thank you, Mister Scott. Valeris, please inform Starfleet Command our warp drive is inoperative.
VALERIS: A lie?
SPOCK: An error.
UHURA: Do you understand? We have lost all contact with the Captain and Doctor McCoy.
SPOCK: Yes, at the moment they're surrounded by a magnetic shield. However, if I know the Captain, by this time he is deep into planning his escape.
[Rura Penthe mine]

(Kirk is fighting with a blue-faced horned alien)
McCOY: You've got him, Jim! You've got him where you want him.
(Kirk is down but is able to deliver a surprise blow)
HORNED ALIEN: Aarrgh! Aaarrrgghh! Aaaaarrrrrgghh!
McCOY: Are you all right, Jim.
KIRK: I think so.
MARTIA: They'll respect you now.
McCOY: That's a comfort.
KIRK: I was lucky that thing had knees.
MARTIA: That was not his knee. ...Not everybody keeps their genitals in the same place, Captain.
KIRK: Anything you want to tell me? ...Bones, why don't you see what you can do for him? Let them know we're not holding a grudge.
McCOY: Suppose he's holding a grudge?
MARTIA: When whoever it is makes their move, you won't be here to ask if he's the one. ...Do you wanna get out of here?
KIRK: There's gotta be a way.
[Rura Penthe sleeping quarters]

McCOY: Three months before retirement. What a way to finish.
KIRK: We're not finished.
McCOY: Speak for yourself. One day, ...one night, ...Kobayashi Maru.
KIRK: Bones, are you afraid of the future?
McCOY: I believe that was the general idea that I was trying to convey.
KIRK: I don't mean this future.
McCOY: What is this? Multiple choice?
KIRK: Some people are afraid ...of what might happen. I was terrified.
McCOY: What terrified you, specifically?
KIRK: No more Neutral Zone. I was used to hating Klingons. ...It never even occurred to me to take Gorkon at his word. ...Spock was right.
McCOY: Try not to be too hard on yourself. We all felt exactly the same.
KIRK: No! Somebody felt a lot worse. ...I'm beginning to understand why.
McCOY: Well, if you've got any bright ideas, now is the time.
KIRK: Time is the problem. You and I are nothing. You heard the judge. The peace conference is on again. Whoever killed Gorkon is bound to attempt another assassination. Unless we can get out of here...
(they hear a sound and feign sleep)
MARTIA: Kirk? It's me, Martia. Listen. No one has ever escaped from Rura Penthe.
KIRK: Except us.
MARTIA: It is possible. ...I know how to get outside the shield.
KIRK: How do we fit in?
MARTIA: Getting outside the shield is easy. But after that it's up to you to get us off the surface before we freeze. Can you?
KIRK: It's possible.
MARTIA: I can't make it alone. You're the likeliest candidate to come to this hellhole for months.
KIRK: Candidate for what?
(Martia kisses him. McCoy reacts knowingly)
MARTIA: Go to lift seven in the morning for mining duty. I'll see you there. Don't disappoint me.
McCOY: What is it with you, anyway?
KIRK: Still think we're finished?
McCOY: More than ever.
[Sulu's quarters]

EXCELSIOR COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER (OC): Sorry to wake you, sir.
SULU: What is it?
EXCELSIOR COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER): Starfleet urgently requests any data we have on the whereabouts of Enterprise.
SULU: What?
EXCELSIOR COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: Apparently they're refusing to acknowledge signal to return to Spacedock, sir.
SULU: Signal Starfleet that, ...we have no idea of location Enterprise.
EXCELSIOR COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: Sir?
SULU: You have hearing problems, Mister?
EXCELSIOR COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: No sir.
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

(Chekov is examining the platform and comes across a violet trace which he collects)
[Enterprise-A science lab]

SPOCK: Klingon blood.
CHEKOV: They must have walked through it when it was floating and tracked it back here.
SPOCK: This is the first evidence that corroborates our theory.
CHEKOV: Now we go to Starfleet?
SPOCK: Now we expand our search to include uniforms.
CHEKOV: All uniforms?
[Enterprise-A corridor]

CREWMAN #3: Clear, sir.
OFFICER: Make a hole.
CREWMAN #4: Coming through. Coming through.
[Enterprise-A crew quarters]

CREWMAN #5: Sir! Sir!
(Valeris takes a gravity boot found in crewman Dax's locker)
[Rura Penthe mine lift]

McCOY: I think we've been had.
MARTIA: No you weren't, Doctor. Get off at the first level and join the gang going into the mine. They don't take girls.
(Martia has morphed into a hairy brute alien)
[Enterprise-A crew quarters]

UHURA: You are Crewman Dax?
DAX: Yes, Commander. What is the problem?
CHEKOV: Perhaps you know Russian epic of Cinderella? ...If the shoe fits, wear it!
SPOCK: Mister Chekov...
(Spock is pointing to Dax's webbed feet which won't fit into a gravity boot)
[Rura Penthe mine]

MARTIA: Watch me.
McCOY: What kind of creature is this? Last night you two were...
KIRK: Don't remind me.
MARTIA: Get in.
(they board a mine train and when they get off Martia morphs into a young girl and slips off her manacles)
MARTIA: come on we don't have a lot of time.
(they enter a tunnel, crawling upwards. Martia has morphed into the hairy brute alien again)
MARTIA: Hurry! ...Up there. ...Come on, climb! ...Here, you'll need these. Quickly!
(she points to bundles of fur garments which they need as they encounter more and more snow)
[Rura Penthe ice-desert]

MARTIA: Stay close!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA (OC): There they are!
SPOCK (OC): They're emerging from the beaming shield.
SPOCK: Mister Scott, start your engines.
SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir.
SPOCK: Mister Chekov, set course for Rura Penthe.
CHEKOV: Mister Spock, Rura Penthe is deep inside the Klingon frontier. If we're discovered...
SPOCK: That's correct, Mister Chekov. What is now required is a feat of linguistic legerdemain, and a degree of intrepidity, before the Captain and Doctor McCoy freeze to death.
[Rura Penthe ice-desert]

(McCoy falls exhausted to the ground)
McCOY: Leave me! I'm finished.
KIRK: No! ...Bones, I'm wearing a viridium patch on my back. Spock slapped it there just before we went on Gorkon's ship.
McCOY: Why, that cunning little Vulcan.
MARTIA: Come on! We're in the clear.
KIRK: Now that we're out of the shield they'll be able to locate us two sectors away.
McCOY: If they're even looking for us.
[Klingon listening post]

SLEEPY KLINGON: (in Klingonese) This is listening post Morska. What ship is that? Over. ...What ship is that? Over. ...What ship is that? Over.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SCOTT: We must respond personally.
CHEKOV: A universal translator would be recognised.
[Klingon listening post]

SLEEPY KLINGON: (in Klingonese) What ship is that? Over.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SLEEPY KLINGON (on intercom): (in Klingonese) What ship is that? Over.
UHURA: (in Klingonese) We art thy freighter ...Ursva.
[Klingon listening post]

UHURA (on intercom): (in Klingonese) Six weeks out of...
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: (in Klingonese) Kronos. ...Over.
[Klingon listening post]

SLEEPY KLINGON: (in Klingonese) Whither are you bound? Over.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SLEEPY KLINGON (on intercom): (in Klingonese) Whither are you bound? Over. Whither are you bound? Over.
SCOTT: What is your destination. Over.
CHEKOV: Rura Penthe...
UHURA: (in Klingonese) Rura Penthe.
[Klingon listening post]

UHURA (on intercom): (in Klingonese) ...We is condemning food, ...things ...and supplies.
SLEEPY KLINGON: (in Klingonese) Don't catch any bugs!
(Klingon laughter)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

(they all laugh like Klingons)
[Rura Penthe ice-desert]

(Martia uses a device to make a camp-fire)
McCOY: Would you mind explaining that little trick you do?
MARTIA: I'm a chameloid.
KIRK: I've heard about you. 'Shapeshifters', I thought you were mythical.
MARTIA (OC): Give a girl a chance, Captain...
[And before his eyes becomes the enticing Martia again]
MARTIA: It takes a lot of effort.
McCOY: I don't doubt it. Stop me if I'm wrong but do we have any way of knowing whether this is the real you?
MARTIA: I thought I would assume a pleasing shape. ...We're outside the shield. Now it's your turn, Captain.
KIRK: If you say so.
(Kirk knocks Martia to the ground)
McCOY: Are you crazy?
KIRK: She didn't need our help getting anywhere. Where did she get these convenient clothes? And don't tell me that flare is standard prison issue. ...It's to let them know where we are. Ask her what she's getting in return.
MARTIA: A full pardon, which doesn't cover this.
KIRK: An accident wasn't good enough. Come on Spock.
MARTIA: Good enough for one. Two would have looked suspicious,...
(Martia morphs into a Kirk duplicate and the fight continues)
MARTIA: ...killed while attempting escape. Now that's convincing for both.
MARTIA: Surprise!
KIRK: Your friends are late.
MARTIA: They'll be along.
KIRK: I can't believe I kissed you.
MARTIA: Must have been your lifelong ambition.
KIRK: Isn't it about time you became something else?
MARTIA: I like it here.
KLINGON COMMANDANT (OC): Well, well, well...
KIRK: What took you so long?
MARTIA: Kill him! He's the one!
KIRK: Not me, you idiot. Him!
(the Klingon Commandant vaporises the Martia Kirk with his disruptor)
KLINGON COMMANDANT: No witnesses!
KIRK: Killed while trying to escape.
McCOY: Damned clever if you ask me.
KIRK: It's a classic.
KLINGON COMMANDANT: That's what he wanted.
KIRK: Who? Who wants us killed?
KLINGON COMMANDANT: Since you're all going to die anyway, why not tell you? His name is...
(Kirk and McCoy disappear in a transporter beam)
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

KIRK: Damn it! What the hell? Son of a... Couldn't you have waited two seconds?
SPOCK: Captain?
KIRK: He was just about to explain the whole thing.
CHEKOV: You want to go back?
McCOY: Absolutely not!
KIRK: Come on!
[Enterprise-A officer's mess]

(Scott is drinking a coffee and studying Enterprise schematics)
UHURA (on tannoy): This is the bridge. We are still in Klingon space. Deck nine. Remain at battle stations. Deck nine. Remain at battle stations.
(he detects a wrong sound and removes a ventilation grille, finding two space-suits)
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KLINGON COMMANDANT (on viewscreen): (in Klingonese) They were beamed aboard a Federation starship! I could trace...
CHANG: (in Klingonese) Escaped. ...Escaped.
KLINGON GENERAL #2: (in Klingonese) Kirk cannot know the location of the peace conference.
CHANG: (in Klingonese) Are you sure? Will you take that chance?
KLINGON GENERAL #2: (in Klingonese) Helmsman, make a course to intercept Enterprise!
[Enterprise-A corridor]

SPOCK: The Klingons have a new weapon. A Bird-of-Prey that can fire while cloaked. She torpedoed Gorkon's ship.
KIRK: So, that's it.
SPOCK: Not entirely. I have reason to believe that Gorkon's murderers are aboard this vessel.
KIRK: I have a problem about that. Has the peace conference begun?
CHEKOV: Who knows? The location is a secret.
KIRK: There's always something.
SCOTT: Captain! Mister Spock, I've found the missing uniforms with the Klingon blood on them!
(as they round a corner they find two crewmen lying dead)
SCOTT: But the uniforms belong to these two men! Burke ...and Samno!
McCOY: Not any more. Phaser on stun at close range.
KIRK: First rule of assassination. Kill the assassins.
SCOTT: Now we're back to square one.
KIRK: Can I talk to you?
McCOY: I wonder why they weren't vaporised?
SCOTT: It would set off the alarm.
(Kirk and Spock have been conferring down the corridor)
SPOCK: It's possible.
[Enterprise-A all decks]

TANNOY VOICE: Now hear this. Now hear this. Court Recorder to sick bay. Code Blue, urgent! Statements to be taken at once from Yeomen Burke and Samno. Repeat. Court Recorder to sick bay. Code Blue, urgent! Statements to be taken. Repeat. Statements to be taken from Yeomen Burke and Samno.
[Enterprise-A sick bay]

(in darkness. Footsteps are heard from a shadowy figure. The lights go on)
SPOCK: You have to shoot. If you are logical, you have to shoot.
VALERIS: I do not want to.
SPOCK: What you want is irrelevant. What you have chosen is at hand.
KIRK: I'd just as soon you didn't.
McCOY: The operation is over.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

VALERIS: I did not fire. You cannot prove anything.
KIRK: Yes I can. At my trial my personal log was used against me. ...How long did you wait outside my quarters before I noticed you?
VALERIS: You knew? ...I tried to tell you but you would not listen.
SPOCK: Neither of us was hearing very well that night, Lieutenant. There were things I tried to tell you, about having faith.
VALERIS: You have betrayed the Federation. ...All of you.
McCOY: And what do you think you've been doing?
VALERIS: Saving Starfleet. Klingons cannot be trusted. Sir, ...you said so yourself. They killed your son. Did you not wish Gorkon dead? 'Let them die.' you said. Did I misinterpret you? ...And you were right. They conspired with us to assassinate their own Chancellor. How trustworthy can they be?
McCOY: Klingons and Federation members conspiring together.
KIRK: Who is 'us?'
VALERIS: Everyone who stands to lose from peace.
KIRK: Names, Lieutenant.
VALERIS: My comrades will make sure all your ship-to-ship transmissions are Jammed.
KIRK: Names, Lieutenant.
VALERIS: I do not remember.
SPOCK: A lie?
VALERIS: A choice.
KIRK: Spock.
(Spock conducts a mind-meld with Valeris)
SPOCK: Admiral Cartwright.
CHEKOV (OC): From Starfleet?
KIRK: Who else?
SPOCK/VALERIS: General ...Chang.
KIRK (OC): Who else?
SPOCK/VALERIS: Romulan Ambassador and others.
KIRK (OC): Where is the peace conference? ...Where is the peace conference?
VALERIS: Ah! ...Ah! ...Ah! ...Aarrgh!
SPOCK: She does not know.
SCOTT: Then we're dead.
SPOCK: I've been dead before. Contact Excelsior. ...She'll have the co-ordinates.
UHURA (OC): I've already got it, sir.
SULU (on viewscreen): Standing by, Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Sulu! You realise that by even talking to us, you're violating regulations.
SULU (on viewscreen): I'm sorry, Captain, your message is breaking up.
KIRK: Bless you, Sulu. Where's the peace conference? They're going to attempt another assassination.
SULU (on viewscreen): The Conference is at Camp Khitomer, near the Romulan border. I'm sending exact coordinates on a coded frequency.
KIRK: I'm afraid we gonna more than that. There's a Bird-of-Prey on the lookout for us. And she can fire while cloaked.
SULU (on viewscreen): Surely not.
KIRK: Hold on. ...How many of those things are there? Come on, Lieutenant!
VALERIS: Just the prototype.
KIRK: Do you hear that?
SULU (on viewscreen): I'm getting underway now. We're now in Alpha Quadrant. The chances of our reaching the conference in time are slim.
KIRK: When does this conference start?
SULU (on viewscreen): According to my information, today.
KIRK: Thank you, Captain Sulu.
SULU (on viewscreen): Don't mention it, Captain Kirk.
[Spock's quarters]

KIRK: Spock?
SPOCK: I prefer it dark.
KIRK: Dining on ashes?
SPOCK: You were right. It was arrogant presumption on my part that got us into this situation. You and the Doctor might have been killed.
KIRK: The night is young. You said it yourself. It was logical. Peace is worth a few personal risks. ...You're a great one for logic. I'm a great one for rushing in where angels fear to tread. We're both extremists. Reality is probably somewhere in between us. ...I couldn't get past the death of my son.
SPOCK: I was prejudiced by her accomplishments as a Vulcan.
KIRK: Gorkon had to die before I understood how prejudiced I was.
SPOCK: Is it possible ...that we two, you and I, have grown so old and so inflexible ...that we have outlived our usefulness? ...Would that constitute a joke?
KIRK: Don't crucify yourself. It wasn't your fault.
SPOCK: I was responsible.
KIRK: For no actions but your own
SPOCK: That is not what you said at your trial.
KIRK: That was as Captain of a ship. Human beings...
SPOCK: But Captain, we both know that I am not human.
KIRK: Do you want to know something? ...Everybody's human.
SPOCK: I find that remark ...insulting.
KIRK: Come on, I need you.
[Camp Khitomer conference hall]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Madam Chancellor, members of the diplomatic corps, ...honoured guests. The United Federation of Planets welcomes you to Camp Khitomer.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK (OC): She's out here, somewhere.
CHEKOV (OC): But if she's cloaked...
KIRK: ...then all we have is a neutron radiation surge, and by the time we're close enough to record it we're ashes.
SPOCK (OC): two oh nine, ...two oh six, ...two oh three...
KIRK: Close enough to beam down?
SPOCK: Not yet, Captain. In two minutes, ...one fifty-eight...
KIRK: Go to impulse power for Khitomer only.
[Camp Khitomer conference hall]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Let us redefine progress to mean that just because we can do a thing it does not necessarily follow that we must do that thing.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Uhura?
UHURA: Nothing, Captain. If she's here, she's rigged for silent running.
[Enterprise-A engineering]

TANNOY VOICE: Coming up on transporter range in fifty-seven seconds. Transporter room. Stand by to beam down, ...fifty-three, ...forty-eight seconds, ...forty-four...
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHANG (on intercom): I can see you, Kirk.
KIRK: Chang!
CHANG (on intercom): Can you see me?
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG: Oh now, be honest, Captain. Warrior to warrior...
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHANG (on intercom): You do prefer it this way, don't you? As it was meant to be. ...No peace in our time. 'Once more unto the breach, dear friends.'
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG (OC): (in Klingonese) Fire!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

McCOY: This is fun.
KIRK: Reverse engines! All astern! One-half impulse power. Back off! Back off!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG: (in Klingonese) What's she doing?
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: What's she waiting for?
SPOCK: Probably trying to ascertain why we are reversing, wondering whether we detect her.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

(Chang signals for another torpedo to launched)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: Incoming.
[Excelsior bridge]

SULU: In range?
LOJUR: Not yet, sir.
SULU: Come on. Come on!
LOJUR: She'll fly apart!
SULU: Fly her apart, then!
[Camp Khitomer conference hall]

AZETBUR: Many speculated about my father's motives. There were those who said he was an idealist, others said he had no choice. If Praxis had not exploded, then quite possibly his idealism would not have found expression.
(a Klingon carrying a large briefcase is seen walking in a Camp Khitomer corridor)
AZETBUR: We are a proud race. We are here because we want to go on being proud.
(a third torpedo strikes Enterprise)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Go to auxiliary power!
SULU: Auxiliary circuits destroyed, Captain.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG: 'Tickle us, do we not laugh? Prick us, do we not bleed? Wrong us, shall we not revenge?'
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SPOCK: Gas. ...Gas, Captain. Under impulse power she expends fuel like any other vessel. We call it 'plasma' but whatever the Klingon designation is, it is merely ionised gas.
UHURA: Well, what about all that equipment we're carrying to catalogue gaseous anomalies? ...Well, the thing's got to have a tail pipe.
SPOCK: Doctor, would you care to assist me in performing surgery on a torpedo?
McCOY: Fascinating!
(the ship is hit again)
KIRK: Hard to starboard!
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

(the Klingon with the briefcase is seen overlooking the conference hall)
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): The proposed agenda is as follows. The total evacuation of Kronos has been calculated within the fifty Earth year time span. Phase one, preparation for evacuation...
[Enterprise-A engine room]

SCOTT: Captain! She's packing quite a wallop. Shields weakening.

[Excelsior bridge]

SULU: Shields up! All right, now we're giving them something else to shoot at.
LOJUR (OC): Aye sir.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG: Ah, the game's afoot.
(a torpedo hits Excelsior)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: Excelsior's been hit!
CHANG (on intercom): 'Our revels now are ended', Kirk!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG: 'Cry havoc, and let slip the dogs of war.'
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK (OC): Bones, where's my torpedo?
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

McCOY: Bet you wish you'd stood in bed.
[Enterprise-A engineering]

SCOTT: Shields collapsing!
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

SPOCK: The key, please, Doctor. Time is short.
(another torpedo rips through the Enterprise)
SPOCK: The hull has been compromised.
McCOY: I wonder how bad.
SPOCK: Connect echo bars.
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): ...discuss the report on Phase two...
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

SPOCK: Alter circuit A.
McCOY: Sensor.
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): ...propose we commence within minutes of the preparation...
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG (OC): 'I am constant as the Northern Star.'
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

McCOY: I'd give real money if he'd shut up.
SPOCK (OC): Plate please.
McCOY (OC): Plate.
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

(the Klingon with the brief case is assembling a rifle)
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): ...and assimilation will continue...
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

McCOY (OC): We've got a heartbeat.
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): ...with the Klingon Empire...
[Enterprise-A torpedo bay]

SPOCK: Key please.
McCOY: Key.
KIRK (on intercom): Where's that damned torpedo.
McCOY: She's ready, Jim. ...Lock and load.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Fire!
(the torpedo loops through space towards the Bird-of-Prey)
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHANG: 'To be, or not ...to be.'
[Excelsior bridge]

SULU: Target that explosion and fire.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Fire!
(together the Enterprise and the Excelsior destroy the Bird-of-Prey)
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): ...as I imagine this work will occupy us throughout most of the week, it will be my hope that the delegations can return to the capital to implement the provisions of Phase one no later than the first of next month...
(the Enterprise bridge crew beam into a corridor outside the conference hall)
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): ...As you know time is of the essence.
(the crew burst into the conference hall as the Klingon with his rifle now assembled targets the Federation President)
[Camp Khitomer conference hall]

KIRK: Out of the way!
UHURA: Out of the way!
KIRK: Mister President! ...Mister President!
(Kirk hurls the President to the floor as the rifle fires)
KIRK: Kirk, ...Enterprise.
KERLA: Protect the Chancellor.
CARTWRIGHT: Arrest those men!
SPOCK (OC): Arrest yourself.
(Spock reveals Valeris under arrest)
McCOY: We've got a full confession.
[Camp Khitomer gallery]

(Scott shoots the Klingon marksman sending him hurtling down into the conference hall)
[Camp Khitomer conference hall]

KERLA (OC): This is not Klingon blood.
(Sulu beams in)
SULU: Cartwright! Just a minute.
(Kerla strips off a Klingon face mask from the marksman)
C in C (OC): It's Colonel West.
AZETBUR: What's happened! What's the mean of all of this?
KIRK: It's about the future, Madam Chancellor. Some people think the future means the end of history. ...But we haven't run out of history just yet. ...Your father called the future ...'the undiscovered country'. ...People can be very frightened of change.
AZETBUR: You've restored my father's faith.
KIRK: And you've restored my son's.
(applause slowly breaks out in the conference hall)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Once again we've saved civilisation, as we know it.
McCOY: And the good news is they're not going to prosecute.
UHURA: They might as well have prosecuted me. I felt like Lieutenant Valeris.
McCOY: Well, they don't arrest people for having feelings.
CHEKOV: And it's a good thing too. If we did we'd all have to turn ourselves in.
SULU (on viewscreen): Captain Kirk?
KIRK: Captain Sulu! ...As much to the crew of the Enterprise, I owe you my thanks.
SULU (on viewscreen): Nice to see you in action one more time, Captain Kirk. Take care.
McCOY: My God, that's a big ship.
SCOTT: Not so big as her Captain, I think.
CHEKOV: So ...this is goodbye.
KIRK: I think it's about time we got underway ourselves.
UHURA: Captain, I have orders from Starfleet Command. We're to put back into Spacedock immediately, ...to be decommissioned.
SPOCK: If I were human, I believe my response would be 'Go to Hell!' ...If I were human.
CHEKOV: Course heading, Captain?
KIRK: Second star to the right, ...and straight on 'til morning.
Captain's log, U.S.S. Enterprise, stardate 9529.1. This is the final cruise of the Starship Enterprise under my command. This ship and her history will shortly become the care of another crew. To them and their posterity will we commit our future. They will continue the voyages we have begun and journey to all the undiscovered countries, boldly going where no man, where no one, ...has gone before.






[Nimbus III desert}

Nimbus III
In the Neutral Zone
"The Planet of Galactic Peace"
(out of a dust storm a horseman approaches an alien drilling for water. The horseman dismounts and addresses the alien)
SYBOK: I thought weapons were forbidden on this planet. ... Besides, I can't believe you'd kill me for a field of empty holes.
J'ONN: It's all I have.
SYBOK: Your pain runs deep.
J'ONN: What do you know of my pain?
SYBOK: Let us explore it ...together. ...Each man hides a secret pain. It must be exposed and reckoned with. It must be dragged from the darkness and forced into the light. Share your pain. ...Share your pain with me and gain strength from it.
J'ONN: Where did you get this power?
SYBOK: The power was within you.
J'ONN: It is as if a weight has been lifted from my heart. How can I repay you for this miracle?
SYBOK: Join my quest.
J'ONN: What is it you seek?
SYBOK: What you seek. What all men have sought since time began, ...the ultimate knowledge. To find it, we'll need a starship.
J'ONN: A starship? There are no starships on Nimbus Three.
SYBOK: Perhaps I have a way to bring one here.
J'ONN: But how?
SYBOK: Have faith my friend. There are more of us than you know.
J'ONN: You're a Vulcan!
OPENING CREDITS
Yosemite National Park
Planet Earth
Stardate 8454.1
(Kirk climbing El Capitan)
[Yosemite campsite]

McCOY: 'You'll have a great time, Bones. You'll enjoy your shore leave. You'll be able to relax.' You call this relaxing? I'm a nervous wreck. ...If I'm not careful I'll end up talking to myself.
[El Capitan]

(Spock appears alongside Kirk on levitation boots)
SPOCK: Greetings, Captain.
KIRK: Spock! ...What are you doing in this neck of the woods?
SPOCK: I have been monitoring your progress.
KIRK: I'm flattered. Twelve hundred points of interest in Yosemite, you pick me.
SPOCK: I regret to inform you that the record time for free-climbing El Capitan is in no danger of being broken.
KIRK: I'm not trying to break any records. I'm doing this because I enjoy it. Not to mention the most important reason for climbing a mountain.
SPOCK: And that is?
KIRK: Because it's there.
SPOCK: Captain, I do not think you realise the gravity of your situation.
KIRK: On the contrary. Gravity is foremost on my mind. Look, I'm trying to make an ascent here. Why don't you go pester Doctor McCoy for a while?
SPOCK: I believe that Doctor McCoy is not in the best of moods.
[Yosemite campsite]

McCOY: Goddamn irresponsible! ...Playing games with life.
[El Capitan]

SPOCK: Concentration is vital. You must be one with the rock.
KIRK: Spock, I appreciate your concern but if you don't stop distracting me, I'm liable to be one with the...
(Kirk plunges Earthwards, Spock using his levitation boots heads after him catching him inches from the ground)
[Yosemite campsite]

SPOCK: Perhaps 'because it is there' is not a sufficient reason for wanting for climbing a mountain.
KIRK: I'm hardly in a position to disagree.
KIRK: Hi, Bones. Mind if we drop in for dinner?
[Nimbus III desert]

Paradise City
Nimbus III
[Paradise City saloon backroom]

CAITHLIN: Gentlemen, I'm Caithlin Dar.
TALBOT: Ah, yes. Our new Romulan representative. Welcome to Paradise City, my dear, capital of the so-called 'Planet of Galactic Peace.' I'm St. John Talbot, the Federation representative here on Nimbus Three and my charming companion, here, is the Klingon consul Korrd.
KORRD: Ugghhhh!
CAITHLIN: I expect that's Klingon for hello.
TALBOT (OC): Won't you come in, my dear?
(Sybok and his followers approach Paradise City)
CAITHLIN: Twenty years ago, our three governments agreed to develop this planet together. A new age was born.
TALBOT: Our new age died a quick death. And the settlers we conned into coming here, they were the dregs of the galaxy. They immediately took to fighting amongst themselves. We forbad them weapons, but they soon began to fashion their own.
CAITHLIN: Right! Then it appears I've arrived just in time.
(a klaxon sounds and the three of them rush outside as Sybok and his followers storm the city)
[Paradise City saloon backroom]

J'ONN: Get away from that transmitter!
SYBOK: Romulan. ...Terran. ...Klingon. Consider yourselves my prisoners.
TALBOT: Prisoners? We're already prisoners here on this worthless lump of rock. What possible value could we be to you?
SYBOK: Nimbus Three may be a worthless lump of rock, but it does have one unique treasure. It's the only place in the entire galaxy that has the three of you.
CAITHLIN: I don't know who you are or what you want but I can tell you this. Our governments will stop at nothing to ensure our safety.
SYBOK: That's exactly what I'm counting on.
[Spacedock]

SCOTT (OC): U.S.S. Enterprise, shakedown cruise report. I think this new ship was put together by monkeys. Och, she's got a fine engine, but half the doors won't open, and guess whose job it is to make it right?

[Enterprise-A bridge]

SCOTT: Borgus frat! 'Let's see what she's got' said the Captain. And then we found out, didn't we?
UHURA: I know you'll whip her into shape, Scotty. You always do.
SCOTT: Uhura, I thought you were on leave?
UHURA: And I thought we were supposed to be going together.
SCOTT: Oh I can't leave her when she needs me the most.
UHURA: I had a feeling you would say something like that. So I brought us ...dinner.
SCOTT: Oh lass, you're the most understanding woman I know.
COMMAND VOICE: (distorted) RED ALERT. RED ALERT.
SCOTT: I just fixed that damn thing. Turn it off, will you?
COMMAND VOICE: RED ALERT. RED ALERT. This is a RED ALERT. Enterprise, acknowledge.
UHURA: This is Enterprise. Identify yourself.
COMMAND VOICE: Enterprise, this is Starfleet. We have a Priority Seven situation in the Neutral Zone.
UHURA: Stand by, Starfleet. ...Scotty, this is for real.
SCOTT: They can't be serious! The ship's in pieces and we've got less than a skeleton crew aboard.
UHURA: Starfleet, are you aware of our current status?
COMMAND VOICE: Current status understood. Stand by to copy operational orders and recall key personnel.
[Earth - forest]

CHEKOV: Admit it. We're lost.
SULU: All right, we're lost. But we're making good time.
UHURA (on communicator): Commander Sulu, come in please.
SULU: I don't believe this. Commander Sulu here.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: Bad news, gentlemen. Shore leave is cancelled.
[Earth - forest]

CHEKOV: Rescued at last.
UHURA (on communicator): Return to the prearranged coordinates for pickup.
CHEKOV: You can't tell them we're lost. We'd never live it down.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: Is there a problem, gentlemen?
[Earth - forest]

SULU: Er, ...yes. Er... We've been caught in a blizzard!
CHEKOV: Shhhh, Shhhh, and we can't see a thing. Request you direct us to the co-ordinates.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: My visual says ...sunny skies and seventy degrees.
CHEKOV: Sulu! Look! The sun's come out! It's a miracle!
UHURA (on intercom): Don't worry, fellas. Your secret's safe with me. I'll send the shuttlecraft to pick you up.
SULU: Uhura, I owe you one.
[Yosemite campsite]

McCOY: Come and get it! Come and get it!
KIRK: Bones! Bones! Knock it off. We're right here, ...and we're starving.
SPOCK: Bi-podal seeds, Doctor?
McCOY: Beans, Spock, but no ordinary beans. These are from an old Southern recipe handed down to me by my father. And if you stick your Vulcan nose up at these, you're not only insulting me, but generations of McCoys.
SPOCK: In that case, I have little choice but to sample your beans. ...Hm! Surprisingly good. It does have a flavouring I am not familiar with.
McCOY: Ah! That's the secret ingredient.
KIRK: Got any more of that secret ingredient, Bones?
McCOY: Be my guest, Captain.
KIRK: Thank you.
SPOCK: Am I to understand that your secret ingredient is ...alcohol?
McCOY: Whiskey. Tennessee whiskey, Spock! . Care for a little snort?
KIRK: Bourbon and beans. An explosive combination. Do you think Spock can handle it?
McCOY: Are you kidding? With that Vulcan metabolism he could eat a bowl of termites and it wouldn't bother him.
SPOCK: As you are so fond of pointing out, Doctor, I am half human.
McCOY: Well, it certainly doesn't show.
SPOCK: Thank you.
McCOY: How do you like it? This guy never changes. I insult him and he takes it as a compliment. ...Uh, you two of you could drive a man to drink.
KIRK: Me? What did I do?
McCOY: What did you do? You piss me off. Human life is far too precious to risk on crazy stunts. Maybe it didn't cross that macho mind of yours that you should have been killed when you fell off that mountain.
KIRK: It crossed my mind.
McCOY: And?
KIRK: And, as I fell, I knew I wouldn't die.
McCOY: I thought he was the only one who's immortal.
KIRK: It isn't that, Bones. I knew I wouldn't die because the two of you were with me.
SPOCK: I do not understand.
KIRK: I've always known ...I'll die alone.
McCOY: Well, I'll call Valhalla and reserve you a room. It's a mystery what draws us together. All that time in space ...getting on each other's nerves ...and what do we do when shore leave comes along? We spend it together. Other people have families.
KIRK: Other people, Bones. Not us. ...What are you doing?
SPOCK: I am preparing to toast a 'marsh melon'.
McCOY: Well, I'll be damned. A marsh melon. Where did you learn to do that?
SPOCK: Before leaving the ship I consulted the computer library to familiarise myself with the customs associated with 'camping out.'
McCOY: Tell me, Spock. What do we do after we toast the marsh, ...er, melons?
SPOCK: We consume them.
McCOY: I know we consume them. I mean after that.
SPOCK: I believe we are required to engage in a ritual known as the sing-a-long.
KIRK: I haven't sung around a campfire since I was a boy in Iowa. Wait a minute. Bones, what are we gonna sing?
McCOY: How about 'Camptown Races?'
KIRK: 'Pack Up Your Troubles.'
SPOCK: Are we leaving, Captain?
McCOY: It's a song title, Spock.
SPOCK: Ah.
KIRK: 'Moon Over Rigel Seven?'
McCOY: 'Row, Row, Row Your Boat.'
KIRK: 'Row, Row, Row Your Boat.' I love 'Row, Row... Do you 'Row, Row, ...Row Your Boat', Spock?
SPOCK: That song did not come up in my research, Captain.
KIRK: The lyrics are very simple. It's 'Row, row, row your boat, gently down the stream, ...merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily, life is but a dream.' The Doctor and I will start it off and then when we give you the signal you jump in. Doctor if you please.
McCOY: Don't say I didn't warn you.
KIRK/McCOY: 'Row, row, row your boat gently down the stream merrily, merrily, merrily, ...merrily, life...'
KIRK: Come on, Spock? Why didn't you jump in?
SPOCK: I was trying to comprehend the meaning of the words.
McCOY: It's a song, you green-blooded a Vulcan. You sing it. The words aren't important. What's important is that you have a good time singing it.
SPOCK: Oh, I am sorry, Doctor. ...Were we having a good time?
McCOY: God! I liked him better before he died.
KIRK: No, no, no, stop it. Let's... Let's go to bed and just let's get some sleep?
SPOCK: Captain?
KIRK: Spock, we're on leave. Call me Jim.
SPOCK: Jim?
KIRK: Yes, Spock?
SPOCK: Life is not a dream.
KIRK: Go to sleep, Spock.
SPOCK: Yes Captain.
KIRK: Good night, Bones.
McCOY: Good night, Jim.
KIRK: Good night, Spock.
SPOCK: Good night, Doctor.
McCOY: Good night, Spock.
SPOCK: Good night, Jim.
(the Pioneer 10 probe is seen drifting in space)
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

VIXIS: (in Klingonese) Captain Klaa, we have the target in sight. A probe of ancient origin.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Difficult to hit?
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) Most difficult.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Good. All weapons at my control. ...Scope!
(the probe is sent spinning by the first shot and is destroyed by the second)
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Shooting space garbage is no test of a warrior's mettle. I need a target that fights back.
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) Captain, new data. Hostages on Nimbus Three.
(more information is received on the viewscreen)
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) One of the hostages is a Klingon.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) And the others?
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) A Terran and a Romulan.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) That means the Federation will be sending a rescue ship of its own. Plot course for Nimbus Three. ...I've always wanted to engage a Federation ship.
[Yosemite campsite]

(noise and downdraught from a hovering shuttlecraft awake the campers)
McCOY: Get that damn light out of my face!
UHURA: Mister Scott apologises for having to send the shuttlecraft The transporter beam is non-operational. Captain, we've received important orders from Starfleet Command.
KIRK: Why didn't you beep my communicator?
UHURA: You forgot to take it with you.
KIRK: Wonder why I did that? ...Well, gentlemen, it appears shore leave's been cancelled. Pack out your trash.
[Galileo 5]

KIRK: 'All I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by.'
McCOY: Melville.
SPOCK: John Masefield.
McCOY: Are you sure about that?
SPOCK: I am well versed in the classics, Doctor
McCOY: Then how come you don't know 'Row, Row, Row Your Boat?'
[Enterprise-A shuttlebay control room]

UHURA (OC): Ready for landing maneuver. Enterprise, you have control.
SCOTT: We're doing just fine.
[Enterprise-A shuttlebay]

SCOTT: All I can say is they don't make 'em like they used to.
KIRK: You told me you could have the ship operational in two weeks. I gave you three. What happened?
SCOTT: I think you gave me too much time, Captain.
KIRK: Very well, Mister Scott. Carry on.
SCOTT: Right, sir. ...How many times do I have to tell you? The right tool for the right job.
McCOY: I don't think I've ever seen him happier.
[Enterprise-A turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge, ...I hope. ...I could use a shower.
SPOCK: Yes.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

(the turbolift doors fail to open properly)
KIRK: Doesn't anything work on this ship?
McCOY: Starfleet's got some nerve sending us out in this condition. Why, the ship's a virtual ghost town.
UHURA: Captain! Starfleet transmission on-line.
KIRK: Put it on the viewscreen screen, will you please? ...Can we have a little quiet, please? ...Can you clear that up? ...Can we have a little quiet? ...Bob?
ADMIRAL BENNETT (on viewscreen): Jim? Well, we're dressing informally, aren't we?
KIRK: You caught me on my way to the shower.
ADMIRAL BENNETT (on viewscreen)): I apologise for cancelling shore leave but look, we have a dangerous situation out on Nimbus Three.
KIRK: On 'The Planet of Galactic Peace?'
ADMIRAL BENNETT (on viewscreen): The same. From what we can make out, a terrorist force has captured the only settlement and they've taken hostages. The Klingon, the Romulan and the Federation consuls. Now I know Enterprise is not exactly up to specs...
KIRK: With all due respect, the Enterprise is a disaster. There must be other ships in the Quadrant.
ADMIRAL BENNETT (on viewscreen): Other ships, yes, but no experienced commanders. Captain, ...I need Jim Kirk. Your orders are to proceed to Nimbus Three, assess the situation and avoid confrontation if possible. Above all, however, all get those hostages back safely.
KIRK: Have the Klingons responded?
ADMIRAL BENNETT (on viewscreen): No, but you can bet they will.
KIRK: Understood. Kirk out. Plot course to Nimbus Three, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Aye sir. Course plotted.
KIRK: I'm afraid the ship's problems will have to be solved en route. Since we're undermanned I'm counting on each one of you to give his best. End of speech. Let's go to work.
McCOY: Jim! If you ask me, ...and you haven't, I think this is a terrible idea. We're bound to bump into the Klingons and they don't exactly like you.
KIRK: The feeling's mutual. Engine room.
SCOTT (OC): Scotty here.
KIRK: We'll need all the power you can muster, Mister
[Enterprise-A engineering]

SCOTT: Don't you worry, Captain. We'll beat those Klingon devils even if I have to get out and push.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: I hope it won't come to that, Mister Scott. ...All possible speed, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Aye sir.
McCOY: What's the matter, Jim?
KIRK: I miss my old chair.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

VIXIS: (in Klingonese) The Starship Enterprise has been dispatched to Nimbus Three.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Enterprise? That's Kirk's ship. ...If I could defeat Kirk...
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) ...you would be the greatest warrior in the galaxy.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Maximum speed! ...Success!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

(Kirk is using a new electronic log book)
KIRK (OC): Captain's log. Stardate eighty-four fifty... Captain's log, stardate eighty-four...
(the log book fails for the second time. He shuts it)
LOGBOOK: Good morning, Captain.
KIRK: ...Forget it.
UHURA: Captain, we are receiving the hostage information you requested.
KIRK: Put it on the screen.
STARFLEET VOICE: This is an authorised transmission from the Starfleet Command memory bank.
KIRK: Not General Korrd!
SPOCK: The same. He has apparently fallen out of favour with the Klingon High Command.
KIRK: General Korrd's military strategies were required learning when I was a cadet at the Academy. When they put me out to pasture, I hope I fare better than Korrd.
McCOY: Ah, this must be the hostage tape.
CAITHLIN (on viewscreen): A short time ago we surrendered ourselves to the forces of the Galactic Army of Light. At this moment, we are in their protective custody. Their leader assures us that we will be treated humanely as long as we co-operate with his demands. I believe his sincerity. He requests that you send a Federation starship to parlay for our release at once. Be assured we are in good health and would appreciate your immediate response.
SYBOK (on viewscreen): I deeply regret this desperate act but these are desperate times. I have no desire to harm these innocents but do not put me to the test. I implore you... I implore you to respond, ...immediately.
KIRK: What is it? You look like you've just seen a ghost.
SPOCK: Perhaps I have, Captain.
[Enterprise-A forward observation room]

KIRK: Spock, what is it? Do you know this Vulcan?
SPOCK: I cannot be sure.
KIRK: But he does seem familiar.
SPOCK: He reminds me of someone I knew in my youth.
McCOY: Why, Spock, I didn't know you had one.
SPOCK: I do not often think of the past.
KIRK: Who is it he reminds you of?
SPOCK: There was a young student, ...exceptionally gifted, ...possessing ...great intelligence. It was assumed that one day he would take his place amongst the great scholars of Vulcan. But he was a revolutionary.
KIRK: What do you mean?
SPOCK: The knowledge and experience he sought were forbidden by Vulcan belief.
KIRK: Forbidden?
SPOCK: He rejected his logical upbringing. He embraced the animal passions of our ancestors.
KIRK: Why?
SPOCK: He believed that the key to self-knowledge was emotion, ...not logic.
McCOY: Imagine that. A passionate Vulcan.
SPOCK: When he encouraged others to follow him, he was banished from Vulcan, never to return.
KIRK: Fascinating.
UHURA (OC): Captain to the bridge.
KIRK: On my way. ...Spock?
SPOCK: Coming, Captain.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SULU: Approaching Nimbus Three.
UHURA (OC): Hailing frequencies open.
KIRK: Standard orbit, Mister Sulu.
UHURA: Captain, we're receiving a transmission from Paradise City. They are demanding to know our intentions.
KIRK: Respond with static. Let them think we're having difficulty. It wouldn't be far from the truth.
UHURA: Paradise City, can you boost your power? We are barely receiving transmission.
KIRK: Transporter room. Status.
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

SCOTT: Scotty here, Captain. Transporter still inoperative. Even if we could lock on to the hostages, we could'na beam them up.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

KIRK: Then we'll have to get them out the old fashioned way.
SPOCK: Klingon vessel now entering. Bird-of-Prey. Estimating one point nine hours until her weapons come to bear.
KIRK: Damn. Let's go.
[Galileo 5]

SPOCK: Their scanning equipment is primitive but effective. I recommend we land at co-ordinates eight five six three.
KIRK: That puts us pretty far away from Paradise City.
SPOCK: To land any closer would be to risk detection.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, ...execute.
SULU: Aye sir.
[Paradise City saloon backroom]

CHEKOV (OC): Paradise City, this is the Starship Enterprise.
SYBOK: A Federation starship.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): This is Captain Pavel Chekov. You are in violation of Neutral Zone treaty. I advise you to release your hostages at once or suffer the consequences.
SYBOK: Your threats amuse me, Captain Chekov. What consequences did you have in mind?
(the Galileo 5 shuttlecraft lands and all personnel disgorge)
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): Even as we speak, a Klingon warship is on its way. We estimate arrival within the hour.
SYBOK: I imagine the Klingons will be quite angry.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): You are a master of understatement. They're likely to destroy the planet.
SYBOK: Then it's fortunate I have you and your starship to protect me. In the meantime, Captain Chekov, I instruct you and your first officer to beam down to my co-ordinates.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): We will be happy to beam down but first we must have certain assurances.
[Nimbus III - desert]

SPOCK: At footspeed I estimate the journey to Paradise City at one point two hours.
KIRK: We don't have one point two hours.
(Kirk spots a line of tethered horses)
KIRK: Wait a minute! But we'll have to get their attention.
(on a hilltop with two moons behind her Uhura sings while she performs an exotic dance)
REBEL: What's that? ...Is she naked?
UHURA: Hello boys! ...I've always wanted to play to a 'captive' audience.
REBEL: Oh, damn!
(Kirk and crew thunder across the desert on the horses towards Paradise City)
KIRK: Spock.
SPOCK: Yes, Captain?
KIRK: Be one with the horse.
SPOCK: Yes Captain.
[Paradise City gate]

J'ONN: Open the gate. It's our lookout party.
KIRK: Federation soldiers are right behind us! Close the gate!
[Paradise City streets]

J'ONN: Where are they going?
KIRK: Spock.
SPOCK: Hold your horse, Captain. I am scanning. The hostages are being held in that structure.
KIRK: Galileo, this is Strike Team. Start your run. ...Phasers on stun! Get rid of the mounts! Sulu, take out that light!
[Paradise City saloon backroom]

SYBOK: What's going on?
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): I instruct you to surrender at once. You are under attack by superior Federation forces.
SYBOK: Do you realise what you've done? It wasn't bloodshed I wanted.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): Wait! Come back!
[Paradise City streets]

(outside in the streets a battle ensues. Spock fells a horse with a nerve pinch)
KIRK: Uhura, Come on down.
[Galileo 5]

UHURA: Roger, coming in.
[Paradise City saloon]

(Kirk enters the darkened saloon and a Catwoman leaps on him. He finally dumps her in an aquarium)
RECORDED ANNOUNCEMENT: Nimbus Three is famous for its wildlife and the fishing is terrific. Easy financing through Federation Federal can take you there.
[Paradise City saloon backroom]

KIRK: Thank God.
CAITHLIN: Please co-operate.
TALBOT: Would you mind handing over your weapons?
[Paradise City streets]

SYBOK: Well done, my friends.
(Kirk and the rest of the prisoners including Uhura pass through the cheering crowd)
SPOCK: Qual se tu?
SYBOK: Spock! ...Spock! It's me. It's Sybok. After all these years you've finally caught up with me. Don't you have anything to say to me?
SPOCK: You are under arrest for seventeen violations of Neutral Zone Treaty.
SYBOK: Ha, ha, ha! ...Spock! You've developed a sense of humour after all.
SPOCK: It was not my intention to amuse you. These are serious charges. However if you surrender now....
SYBOK: I'm sorry, Spock, I can't surrender now. I'm not through violating Neutral Zone Treaty. ...In fact, I'm just getting started. And for my next violation, I intend to steal something, ... something very big. ...I must have your starship.
KIRK: You staged all this to get your hands on my ship?
SYBOK: Who are you?
KIRK: James T. Kirk, ...Captain of the Enterprise.
SYBOK: But I thought Captain Chekov. ...I see. Very clever, Captain. Spock, it would appear you've been given a second chance to join me. What do you say?
SPOCK: I am a Starfleet officer.
SYBOK: Of course. Then I'll take the ship without your help.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SCOTT: Shuttle en route.
CHEKOV: Position, Bird of Prey?
SCOTT: Closing.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

VIXIS: (in Klingonese) Estimating attack range in eight thousand kellicams.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Stealth approach. Slow to one-quarter impulse power. Prepare to cloak. ...Engage cloaking device.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Chekov, I've lost the Bird of Prey. She must've cloaked.
CHEKOV: Raise shields.
SCOTT: The shuttle?
CHEKOV: Do it. Go to RED ALERT.
[Galileo 5]

TALBOT: Once we've taken control of your vessel, we'll bring up the rest of our followers.
KIRK: The Klingons are out there. We'll be lucky to get back to the ship ourselves.
CHEKOV (OC): Galileo, this is Enterprise. RED ALERT. Bird of Prey approaching, ...cloaked. Raising shields.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: Recommend Galileo find safe harbour until situation secure. Acknowledge.
[Galileo 5]

SYBOK: No! ...No reply. Remain on course.
KIRK: Sybok, listen to me. In order for this craft to enter the landing bay, Enterprise must lower the shields and activate the tractor beam. To bring us inside and then re-raise the shields will take...
SPOCK: Exactly fifteen point five seconds.
KIRK: An eternity during which we'll be vulnerable to a Klingon attack. Korrd, ...you tell him.
KORRD: He speaks the truth. If my people are cloaked then they intend to strike.
SYBOK: We cannot turn back.
SPOCK: You must allow us to act.
KIRK: Let me do something.
SYBOK: Very well. Do what you must ...but no more.
KIRK: Enterprise, this is Kirk.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KLAA: (in Klingonese) Kirk! He's on the shuttlecraft! Alter the attack course!
[Galileo 5]

KIRK: Understand your situation. Are unable to return to planet. Stand by to execute ...Emergency Landing Plan ...B.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: What's Emergency Landing Plan B?
SCOTT: I don't have a clue.
KIRK (on intercom): B as in 'barricade.'
SCOTT: He can't be serious.
[Galileo 5]

SYBOK: What are you doing?
KIRK: In order to lower and raise shields as quickly as possible, we're going to forego the tractor beam and fly her in manually.
McCOY: Manually?
SYBOK: How often have you done this?
SULU: Actually, it's my first attempt.
KIRK: He's good. ...Really. ...Scotty, on my mark, open bay doors.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KLAA: (in Klingonese) Stand by to de-cloak for firing.
[Galileo 5]

KIRK: Kirk to Scotty. ...Lower shields!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SCOTT: Lowering shields.
UHURA: Bird of Prey bearing one zero five mark two.
[Galileo 5]

KIRK: Go, Sulu.
(the Galileo 5 shuttlecraft skids into the shuttlebay and is stopped by an arrestor net)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SCOTT: They're in!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KLAA: (in Klingonese) Bear on Enterprise.
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) Enterprise targeted.
[Enterprise-A]

CHEKOV: Warp speed, now!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KLAA: (in Klingonese) Firing!
(Enterprise goes to warp and the shot misses)
KLAA: Track her course! ...He's good.
[Galileo 5]

(as they come to, Sybok beats Kirk to a weapon)
SYBOK: We must change course ...at once.
KIRK: I'll take you to the bridge.
[Enterprise-A shuttlebay]

(Kirk and Sybok fight. The weapon spins clear to Spock's feet)
KIRK: Spock! ...Pick it up!
SPOCK: Sybok, ...you must surrender.
SYBOK: No! ...You must kill me.
KIRK: Shoot him!
SYBOK: For a moment ...I thought you might actually do it.
(McCoy is brought out of the shuttlecraft under restraint)
SYBOK: Put him in the brig with Captain Kirk. Spock, you will accompany me ...to the bridge?
SPOCK: No, ...I will not.
SYBOK: You know I'm right. Then you must join them.
(Uhura and Sulu are bundled out of the shuttlecraft)
KORRD: These two will be useful
SYBOK: Give us a moment alone.
CAITHLIN: Don't be afraid.
[Enterprise-A brig]

KIRK: Dammit. God dammit, Spock!
SPOCK: Captain, what I have done...
KIRK: What you have done is betray every man on this ship.
SPOCK: Worse. I have betrayed you. I do not expect you to forgive me.
KIRK: Forgive you? I ought to knock you on your goddamn ass!
SPOCK: If you think that will help.
McCOY: You want me to hold him, Jim?
KIRK: You stay out of this! ...Why, Spock? Why? All you had to do was pull the trigger.
SPOCK: If I had pulled the trigger, Sybok would be dead.
KIRK: I ordered you to defend your ship.
SPOCK: You ordered me to kill my brother.
KIRK: The man may be a fellow Vulcan, but that doesn't...
SPOCK: You do not understand me, Captain. Sybok, also, is a son of Sarek.
KIRK: He's your brother brother? You made that up.
SPOCK: I did not.
KIRK: You did too. Sybok couldn't possibly be your brother because I happen to know for a fact that you don't have a brother.
SPOCK: Technically, you are correct. I do not have a brother.
KIRK: You see?
SPOCK: I have a half-brother.
KIRK: I've got to sit down.
McCOY: Let me get this straight. You and Sybok have the same father but different mothers.
SPOCK: Exactly. That is correct. Sybok's mother was a Vulcan princess. After her death, Sybok and I were raised as brothers.
KIRK: Why didn't you tell us this before?
SPOCK: I was not prepared to discuss matters of a personal nature. For that I am sorry.
KIRK: That makes everything all right? I'm sorry...
McCOY: Stop it, Jim. Spock could no more kill his own brother than he could kill you. If you want to punish him for what he's done, why don't you throw him in the brig?
KIRK: Right.
McCOY: Besides we've got bigger problems to deal with. Like how the hell do we get out of here? ...I'll say one thing, Spock, you never cease to amaze me.
SPOCK: Nor I myself.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: I was beginning to worry.
UHURA: It's all right, Pavel. Sybok will explain.
CHEKOV: Sulu, what are you doing?
SULU: Plotting our new course.
CHEKOV: New course? You have no authority. ...What's going on here?
SULU: Pavel, I'm doing what I think is right. You've got to listen to this man.
SYBOK: I won't force you. The decision must be yours.
CHEKOV: I don't understand.
SYBOK: Each of us hides a secret pain. Share yours with me and gain strength from the sharing.
[Enterprise-A brig]

KIRK: Ah! Aha.
SPOCK: Useless. ...Unwise!
(Kirk falls off Spock's shoulders having received an electric shock)
KIRK: You could've warned me.
McCOY: He did, Jim.
KIRK: There's got to be a way out of this mess.
SPOCK: This is a new brig, Captain. It is escape proof.
KIRK: How do you know?
SPOCK: The designers tested it using the most intelligent and resourceful person they could find. He failed to escape.
KIRK: This person? He didn't by any chance have pointed ears and an unerring capacity for getting his shipmates into trouble, did he?
SPOCK: He did have pointed ears.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: Following new course. Warp seven.
SULU: Estimating destination in six point seven hours, present speed.
SYBOK: Now that we're underway, it's time I announced my intentions to the rest of the ship.
[Enterprise-A corridor]

SYBOK (on intercom): Brave crew of the Starship Enterprise, consider the question of existence
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SYBOK: These are the questions which man has asked ever since he first gazed at the stars and dreamed.
[Enterprise-A brig]

SYBOK (on viewscreen): My Vulcan ancestors were ruled by their emotions. They felt with their hearts. They made love with their hearts. They believed with their hearts.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SYBOK: And above all else, they believed in a place in which these questions of existence would be answered. Modern dogma tells us this place is a myth. A fantasy concocted by pagans.
[Enterprise-A shuttlebay]

SYBOK (on intercom): It is no fantasy! I tell you ...it exists!
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SYBOK: My brothers, we have been chosen to undertake the greatest adventure of all time, ...the discovery of Sha Ka Ree.
[Enterprise-A brig]

SPOCK: Is it possible?
KIRK: Is what possible?
SPOCK: That he's found it. Sha Ka Ree. The reason Sybok left Vulcan.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SYBOK: Our destination, ...the planet Sha Ka Ree. It lies beyond the Great Barrier...
[Enterprise-A brig]

SYBOK (on viewscreen): ...at the center of the Galaxy.
KIRK: The center of the Galaxy?
SPOCK: Where Sha Ka Ree is fabled to exist.
KIRK: But the center of the Galaxy can't be reached. No ship has ever gone into the Great Barrier. No probe has ever returned.
SPOCK: Sybok possessed the keenest intellect I have ever known.
KIRK: Spock! My only concern is getting the ship back. When that's done and Sybok is in here, you can debate Sha Ka Ree until you're green in the face. ...Until then, you're either with me or you're not.
SPOCK: I am here, Captain.
KIRK: That's a little vague, Spock. ...What's that noise?
SPOCK: It's a primitive form of communication known as Morse Code.
KIRK: You're right, Spock. I'm a little out of practice... That's an 's.'
SPOCK: I believe the next letter is a 't.'
KIRK: 'a' ...'n' ...'d' ...end of word.
McCOY: 'Stand.'
KIRK: New word. 'b' ...'a' ...'c'
SPOCK: ...'k.'
McCOY: 'Back.' 'Stand back.'
KIRK/SPOCK/McCOY: Stand Back!
(the brig wall blows open)
SCOTT: What are you standing around for? Do you not you know a jailbreak when you see one?
[Enterprise-A corridor]

SYBOK: The bond between these three is strong. Difficult to penetrate. This will be quite a challenge.
(they spot the hole in the brig wall)
SULU: We've got to find them!
[Enterprise-A lower decks]

SCOTT: We can't trust anyone now.
KIRK: We can send a distress signal.
McCOY: We'd never make it to the bridge.
SPOCK: There is an emergency sending apparatus in the forward observation room.
KIRK: The only trouble is, it's up there and we're down here.
SCOTT: You might be able to reach it by means of turboshaft number three which is closed for repairs. It's a long and dangerous climb.
McCOY: Some of us get off on long and dangerous climbs.
KIRK: Scotty, get the transporter working. If we make contact with a rescue ship, we'll need it.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
KIRK: Which way to the turboshaft?
SCOTT: Straight down that tunnel to the hydro vent and turn right, then left at the blowscreen. You can't miss it.
KIRK: Mister Scott, you're amazing.
SCOTT: Nothing amazing about it. I know this ship like I know the back of my hand.
(as Scotty turns and walks off in self-congratulation he knocks himself out on an overhanging pipe)
[Enterprise-A corridor]

(klaxon wails. Sybok's followers secure all levels)
[Enterprise-A turboshaft]

KIRK: Look at it this way. We'll get a good workout.
McCOY: Yeah, or a heart attack.
[Enterprise-A lower decks]

SULU: Get Mister Scott to sick bay.
[Enterprise-A turboshaft - level 13]

McCOY: Jim, this is going to take me forever.
KIRK: Where's Spock?
(Spock appears - downwards! - on levitation boots)
SPOCK: I believe I have found a faster way.
(Kirk climbs aboard)
KIRK: Bones?
McCOY: You two go ahead. I'll wait for the next car.
KIRK: We're not splitting up.
(when McCoy climbs aboard they begin to go down)
SPOCK: It would appear we are too heavy.
KIRK: It's all those marsh melons.
(Sulu and some of Sybok's followers appear below)
KIRK: Spock, ...the booster rockets.
SPOCK: If I activate them now, Captain, we'll be propelled upward at unpredictable rate.
KIRK: Fire the rockets!
SULU: Captain! Please come back down.
KIRK: Hit the brakes!
SPOCK: I am afraid I overshot the mark by one level.
McCOY: Nobody's perfect.
[Enterprise-A forward observation room]

KIRK: Spock?
SPOCK: Emergency channel open.
KIRK: To anyone within the sound of my voice. This is Captain James T. Kirk of the Federation Starship Enterprise. If you read me, acknowledge. ...Acknowledge!
COMMAND VOICE: Enterprise, this is Starfleet Command. We read you. Over.
KIRK: A hostile force has taken control of our vessel and put us on a direct course to the Great Barrier. Our co-ordinates are zero zero zero, mark two. Request emergency assistance. Acknowledge.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

COMMAND VOICE/VIXIS: Understood Enterprise. We are dispatching a rescue ship immediately.
KIRK (on intercom): Roger Starfleet.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Plot course zero zero zero, mark two.
VIXIS: (in Klingonese) But, Captain, that course will take us into the Barrier as well.
KLAA: (in Klingonese) Where Kirk goes, we follow.
[Enterprise-A forward observation room]

SYBOK: I trust your message was received?
KIRK: You can't expect us to stand by while you take this ship into the Great Barrier.
SYBOK: What you fear ...is the unknown. The people of your planet once believed their world was flat. ...Columbus proved it was round. They said the sound barrier could never be broken. ...It was broken. They said warp speed could not be achieved. The Great Barrier is the ultimate expression of this universal fear. It is an extension of personal fear. Captain Kirk, I so much want your understanding. I want your respect. Are you afraid to hear me out?
KIRK: I'm afraid of nothing.
SYBOK: Wait outside. ...I'm sure you have many questions. Here, ...amid the stars of our own galaxy, we shall seek the answers together.
[Enterprise-A sick bay]

UHURA: Easy, Scotty. You're back with us.
SCOTT: Uhura. I had the strangest dream. I dreamt that a madman had taken over the Enterprise.
UHURA: Scotty, dear, he's not a madman.
SCOTT: He's not?
UHURA: Sybok has put us in touch with feelings we've always been afraid to express.
SCOTT: I've to get back to the transporter.
UHURA: Scotty! There's so much I want to tell you.
SCOTT: Maybe if I can wait until I'm a wee bit stronger. I don't think I could take it in my present condition. ...Or yours.
[Enterprise-A forward observation room]

SYBOK: Sha Ka Ree. ...'The Source'. ...'Heaven.' ...'Eden.' ...'Call it what you will. The Klingons call it 'Qui'Tu.' To the Romulans, it's 'Vorta Vor.' The Andorian word is, ...is unpronounceable. Still every culture shares this common dream of a place from which creation sprang. For us, that place will soon be a reality.
KIRK: The only reality I see is that I'm a prisoner on my own ship. What is this ...power that you have to control the minds of my crew?
SYBOK: I don't control minds. ...I free them.
McCOY: How?
SYBOK: By making you face your pain and draw strength from it. Once that's done, fear cannot stop you.
McCOY: It sounds like ...brainwashing to me.
SYBOK: Your pain is the deepest of all.
McCOY: What?
SYBOK: I can feel it. Can't you?
McCOY'S FATHER (OC): Leonard.
McCOY: This is some kind of trick.
McCOY'S FATHER (OC): Leonard.
McCOY: Father? Oh, my god. Don't do this to me.
McCOY'S FATHER: Leonard.
McCOY: I'm here, Dad. I'm with you, Dad.
McCOY'S FATHER: The pain, ...stop the pain.
McCOY: I've done everything I can do. You've got to hang on.
McCOY'S FATHER: I can't stand the pain. ...Help me.
McCOY: All my knowledge and I can't save him.
SYBOK: You've done all you can. The support system will keep him alive.
McCOY: You call this alive?
McCOY'S FATHER: Son, ...release me.
McCOY: I can't do that, Dad. ...But how can I watch him suffer like this?
SYBOK: You're a doctor.
McCOY: I'm his son!
(McCoy turns off the life-support)
SYBOK: Why did you do it?
McCOY: To preserve his dignity.
SYBOK: That wasn't the worst of it was it?
McCOY: No.
SYBOK: Was it? Share it.
McCOY: Not long after ...they found a cure. A goddamn cure!
SYBOK: If you hadn't killed him, he might have lived.
McCOY: No! I loved my father. I released him!
SYBOK: Then you did what you thought was right.
McCOY: Yes! No!
SYBOK: Release this pain. Release it! ...This pain has poisoned your soul for a long time. Now you've taken the first step. The other steps we'll take together.
(turning to Spock)
SYBOK: Each man's pain is unique.
SPOCK: I hide no pain.
SYBOK: I know you better than that.
SPOCK: Do you?
KIRK: Spock! ...Don't!
SPOCK: It's all right, Captain. ...Proceed.
YOUNG AMANDA: Screams!
KIRK: What is this?
SPOCK: I believe we are witnessing my birth.
VULCAN PRIESTESS: Sarek, your son.
SAREK: So human.
KIRK: Spock?
KIRK: What have you done to my friends?
SYBOK: I've done nothing. This is who they are, didn't you know that?
KIRK: No, I didn't.
SYBOK: Now learn something about yourself.
KIRK: No. I refuse.
McCOY: Jim, try to be open about this.
KIRK: About what? That I've made the wrong choices in my life? That I turned left when I should've turned right? I know what my weaknesses are. I don't need Sybok to take me on a tour of them.
McCOY: If you'd just...
KIRK: To be brainwashed by this con man?
McCOY: I was wrong. This 'con man' took away my pain!
KIRK: Dammit, Bones, you're a doctor. You know that pain and guilt can't be taken away with the wave of a magic wand. They're things we carry with us, the things that make us who we are. ...If we lose them, we lose ourselves. I don't want my pain taken away. I need my pain.
UHURA (on viewscreen): Sybok!
SYBOK: Captain, I'm afraid you'll have to remain here. Spock, ...Doctor McCoy, ...come with me.
SYBOK: Spock?
SPOCK: I cannot go with you.
SYBOK: Why not?
SPOCK: I belong here.
SYBOK: I don't understand.
SPOCK: Sybok! You are my brother, but you do not know me. I am not the outcast boy you left behind those many years ago. Since that time I found myself and my place and I know who I am. I cannot go with you.
McCOY: I er... I guess you'd better count me out, too.
SYBOK: Then I'll see you on the other side.
KIRK: Wait! ...You know we'll never make it through the Great Barrier.
SYBOK: What if we do? Will that convince you that my vision was true?
KIRK: What vision?
SYBOK: Given to me by God. He waits for me on the other side.
KIRK: You are mad.
SYBOK: Am I? ...We'll see.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SULU: They say no ship can survive this.
SYBOK: I say they're wrong. I say the danger is an illusion.
CHEKOV: We have no instrument readings. Is it there or isn't it?
SYBOK: Mister Sulu, ...full ahead.
SULU: Full ahead, aye.
[Enterprise-A forward observation room]

KIRK (OC): Is it possible?
SPOCK: Fascinating!
McCOY: Are we dreaming?
KIRK: If we are, then life is a dream.
(camera pans down to plaque on ship's wheel 'To boldly go where no man has gone before')
[Enterprise-A bridge]

CHEKOV: Instruments are back on line. Incredible. There's a power source emanating from the planet like nothing I've ever seen.
SYBOK: Sha Ka Ree.
KORRD: Qui'Tu.
CAITHLIN: Vorta Vor.
TALBOT: Eden.
KIRK: About the ship.
SYBOK: The ship needs its Captain.
KIRK: No special conditions?
SYBOK: No conditions.
KIRK: What makes you think I won't turn us around?
SYBOK: Because you too, must know.
KIRK: Well if we're going to do it, we'll do it by the book. Chekov, take the conn. Sulu, standard orbital approach. Uhura, alert the shuttlecraft to stand by. Sybok, Spock, Doctor McCoy come with me. The rest of you, remain on board ...until I determine what it is we're dealing with. ...Well, don't just stand there. God's a busy man!
[Copernicus]

SPOCK: I am no longer in control of the craft.
(after the shuttlecraft has landed Sybok restrains Kirk as he goes to take a phaser)
KIRK: All right, we're play it your way.
[Sha Ka Ree landing site]

KIRK: It's amazing!
SPOCK: The land.
McCOY: The sky.
SYBOK: Just as I knew it would be.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: Scotty, you have to see this.
SCOTT: I don't have the time. The Captain told me to get this transporter working and I'm not about to let him down.
(everybody on the bridge is transfixed by the viewscreen and they do not notice a warning about the Klingon ship)
[Sha Ka Ree crater]

SYBOK: We have travelled far ...by starship.
KIRK: Enterprise, this is Kirk. ...We have...
SPOCK: Sybok. ...Perhaps...
(the ground begins to shake, the skies darken and great rock columns shoot from the ground forming a temple. The four move into the temple and a blue luminescence shoots from the ground and into space)
GOD (OC): Brave souls. Welcome.
McCOY: Is this the voice of God?
GOD (OC): One voice, many faces.
GOD: Does this better suit your expectations?
SYBOK: Qual se tu?
GOD: It is I. ...The journey you took to reach me could not have been an easy one.
SYBOK: It was not. The Barrier stood between us ...but we breached it.
GOD: Magnificent. You are the first to find me.
SYBOK: We sought only your infinite wisdom.
GOD: And how did you breach the Barrier?
SYBOK: With a starship!
GOD: This starship. ...Could it carry my wisdom beyond the Barrier?
SYBOK: It could. Yes!
GOD: Then I shall make use of this starship.
SYBOK: It will be your chariot!
KIRK: Excuse me.
GOD: It will carry my power to every corner of creation.
KIRK: Excuse me. ...I'd just like to ask a question. ...What does God need with a starship?
GOD: Bring the ship closer.
KIRK: I said ...'What does God need with a starship?'
McCOY: Jim, what are you doing?
KIRK: I'm asking a question.
GOD: Who is this creature?
KIRK: Who am I? Don't you know? Aren't you God?
SYBOK: He ...has his doubts.
GOD: You doubt me?
KIRK: I seek proof.
McCOY: Jim, you don't ask the Almighty for his I.D.
GOD: Then here is the proof you seek.
(blue light rays shoot from God's eyes knocking Kirk backwards)
KIRK: Why is God angry?
SYBOK: Why? Why have you done this to my friend?
GOD: He doubts me.
SPOCK: You have not answered his question. What does God need with a starship?
(blue light rays shoot from God's eyes again knocking Spock backwards)
GOD: Do you doubt me?
McCOY: I doubt any God who inflicts pain for his own pleasure.
SYBOK: Stop! The God of Sha Ka Ree would not do this!
GOD: Sha Ka Ree? A vision you created. An eternity I've been imprisoned in this place! The ship! I must have the ship! Now ...give me what I want!
SPOCK: Sybok, ...this is not the God of Sha Ka Ree, ...or any other God!
SYBOK: I don't understand... Reveal yourself to me!
(an image of Sybok strides out of one of God's eyes)
SYBOK/GOD: What's wrong? Don't you like this face? I have so many but this one suits you best.
SYBOK: No! No, ...it's not possible.
GOD: Bring me the ship or I will destroy you!
SYBOK: The ship.
GOD: Bring it closer so that I might join with it. Do it or watch these puny beings ...die horribly.
SYBOK: What have I done?
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Listen carefully.
SPOCK: Sybok.
SYBOK: This is my doing! This is my arrogance, ... my vanity...
SPOCK: Sybok, we must find a way...
SYBOK: No! Save yourselves! ...Forgive me, brother. Forgive me.
...I couldn't help but notice your pain.
GOD: My pain?
SYBOK: It runs deep. Share it with me.
(Sybok boldly enters the shaft and embraces his evil twin)
KIRK: Enterprise, ...are you ready?
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SULU: Enterprise. Torpedo armed.
CHEKOV: But Captain, we're firing directly on your position.
[Sha Ka Ree crater]

KIRK: Send it down Mister Chekov. ...Now! ...Run!
[Sha Ka Ree crater ridge]

SPOCK: Sybok?
KIRK: Let's get out of here.
[Enterprise-A bridge]

UHURA: Sulu, I've lost them.
(the unheeded warning about the Klingon ship is still on the screen)
[Copernicus]

KIRK: Spock, get us out of here!
SPOCK: Thrusters are inoperative.
KIRK: Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Scotty here, Captain.
KIRK: Please tell me the transporter is working.
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

SCOTT: She's got partial power, sir. I might be able to take two of you.
[Copernicus]

KIRK: Beam up Spock and Doctor McCoy now. Do it!
McCOY: Now, just a damned minute...
[Enterprise-A transporter room]

SPOCK: Thank you Mister Scott. Bring up the Captain.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
(the Bird-of-Prey fires disabling both the Enterprise and Copernicus transporters and Kirk flees out onto the planet)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

McCOY: What about Jim? We can't just leave him down there.
SPOCK: Please get a grip on yourself, Doctor. Status report.
UHURA: Klingon captain wishes to name his terms, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: On screen.
KLAA (on viewscreen): This is Captain Klaa of the Klingon Empire. Do not attempt to raise shields or arm weapons or I will destroy you. You are alive for a single reason. The renegade James T. Kirk! Hand him over and I will spare your lives. My transporter stands ready to beam him aboard.
SPOCK: Captain Kirk is not among us.
KLAA (on viewscreen): You lie!
SPOCK: I am a Vulcan. I'm incapable of lying. Captain Kirk is on the planet below.
KLAA (on viewscreen): Then give me his co-ordinates!
SPOCK: General, I am in need of your assistance.
KORRD: My assistance?
SPOCK: You are his superior officer.
KORRD: I'm a foolish old man.
SPOCK: Damn you, sir, you will try!
[Bird-of-Prey in space]

SPOCK (OC): Klingon Commander. Someone wishes to speak with you.
(on the planet Kirk climbs to the highest peak while the malevolent being threatens him. Suddenly there is a burst of firing, from the Bird-of-Prey)
[Sha Ka Ree summit]

KIRK: So it's me you want, you Klingon bastards. ...What are you waiting for?
(Kirk disappears in a Klingon transporter beam)
[Bird-of-Prey transporter room]

(two Klingons take Kirk to the bridge)
KORRD: Release him! ...Kirk, my junior officer has something he wants to say to you.
KLAA: I ...apologise. ...The attack upon your vessel was not authorised my government.
KORRD: Now may I present our new gunner?
KIRK: Spock!
SPOCK: Welcome aboard, Captain.
KIRK: I ...thought I was going to die.
SPOCK: Not possible. You were never alone. ...Please, Captain. Not in front of the Klingons.
[Enterprise-A forward observation room]

SCOTT: Would you care for a wee nip of scotch whisky?
KORRD: Umm.
SCOTT: I never thought I'd ever be drinking with a Klingon.
(St. John Talbot and Caithlin Dar are talking together)
KORRD: And what are you two conspiring about?
TALBOT: We are just thinking how far we've come in such a short space of time.
KORRD: We certainly have.
(Vixis enters followed by Sulu and Chekov)
CHEKOV: She has wonderful muscles.
KIRK: Cosmic thoughts, gentlemen?
McCOY: We were speculating ...'Is God really out there?'
KIRK: Maybe He's not out there, Bones. Maybe He's right here ...in the human heart. ...Spock?
SPOCK: I was thinking of Sybok. I have lost a brother.
KIRK: Yes. ...I lost a brother once. But I was lucky, I got him back.
McCOY: I thought you said men like us don't have families.
KIRK: I was wrong.
[Yosemite campsite]

KIRK: Are you going to pluck that thing or are you going to play something?
McCOY/KIRK/SPOCK: 'Row, row, row your boat gently down the stream...' '...merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily, life is but a dream...'





Captain's log, stardate 8031 in the twenty-third century. As commanding officer of the U.S.S. Enterprise, I look back on our most recent adventure and realise I could not have asked for a more dependable ship or dedicated crew. Chekov, Doctor McCoy, Uhura, Scotty, Sulu, and our late comrade, Spock, whose heroic sacrifice in our last mission is now deeply felt. Our ship and our lives have been endangered by an experimental project called Genesis designed to bring new life to barren moons. We sent Spock's body there to rest in peace.

(scenes from "Star Trek III: The Search for Spock.")

[Kirk's apartment]

SAREK: Why did you leave him on Genesis! Spock trusted you. You denied him his future!
KIRK: I saw no future.
[Electronic center]

SAREK: Only his body was in death, Kirk. ...bring him to us ...and bring that which he gave you ...his living spirit.
[Starfleet officer's lounge]

KIRK: ...if there's a chance that Spock has an eternal soul ...then it's my responsibility. ...Give me back the Enterprise!
MORROW: Out of the question, my friend!
SULU: The word, sir?
KIRK: The word ...is no I am therefore going anyway.
[Spacedock cafeteria]

FIRST OFFICER (on intercom): Sir, someone is stealing the Enterprise!
STARFLEET VOICE: All stations, Yellow Alert!
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Sir. Commander, Starfleet on emergency channel. He orders you to surrender this vessel.
KIRK: No reply, Chekov.
SULU: One minute to space doors.
[Excelsior bridge]

STYLES: Kirk! If you do this, you'll never sit in the Captain's chair again.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Warp speed.
SULU: ...Warp speed.
KIRK: Best speed to Genesis.
Captain's log. (continued) Unfortunately we were not the first to arrive.
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Klingon Bird of Prey, sir! She's arming torpedoes!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK (on viewscreen): ...your presence here is an act of war.
KRUGE: Fire!
Captain's log. (continued) Quickly overpowered, we had no choice but to allow the Klingons aboard, which meant the only way to defeat them was to destroy the Enterprise.
[Enterprise bridge]

TORG: ...The ship appears to be deserted.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: ...They're hiding!
Captain's log. (continued) Leaving our ship for the last time we fled to Genesis.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

COMPUTER VOICE: ...five,...
KRUGE: Get out! Get out...
[Genesis planet - Kirk's landing]

KIRK: ...What have I done?
McCOY: What you had to do...
Captain's log. (continued) Just as the planet began to self-destruct we found Spock, and he was alive. His body had been regenerated but his mind was blank. Escaping Genesis we used the captured Klingon vessel to transport us to Vulcan where a mysterious ceremony was performed by Spock's people in an attempt to restore his memory.
[Vulcan temple area - sunrise]

SPOCK: ...You came back for me.
KIRK: You would have done the same for me.
SPOCK: Why would you do this?
KIRK: Because the needs of the one ...outweigh the needs of the many.
Captain's log. (continued) Meanwhile, back on Earth, the punishment for our disobedience awaited us.
"The cast and crew of Star Trek wish to dedicate this film to the men and women of the spaceship Challenger whose courageous spirit shall live to the twenty-third century and beyond...."
OPENING CREDITS
[Saratoga bridge]

SARATOGA CAPTAIN (OC): What do you make of it?
SARATOGA HELMSMAN: It appears to be a probe, Captain, from an intelligence unknown to us.
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Continue transmitting, universal 'Peace' and 'Hello' in all known languages. ...Get me Starfleet Command.
SARATOGA HELMSMAN: Ready, Captain.
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Starfleet Command, this is U.S.S. Saratoga patrolling Sector Five, Neutral Zone. We are tracking a probe of unknown origin on apparent trajectory to the Terran solar system. Attempts to communicate with the probe have been negative on all known frequencies.
STARFLEET VOICE (on intercom): Continue tracking, Saratoga. We will analyse transmissions and advise.
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Roger, Starfleet, Saratoga out.
[Federation council chamber]

COMPUTER VOICE (on viewscreen): ...six, ...five, ...four, ...three, ...two, ...one...
(on the viewscreen the Enterprise self-destructs)
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: Hold the image. Hold! ...Behold! The quintessential devil in these matters! James T. Kirk, renegade and terrorist! Not only is he responsible for the murder of a Klingon crew, the theft of a Klingon vessel. See now the real plot and intentions, Even as this Federation was negotiating a peace treaty with us, Kirk was secretly developing the Genesis torpedo, conceived by Kirk's son and test detonated by the Admiral himself! The result of this awesome energy was euphemistically called 'The Genesis Planet' ...A secret base from which to launch the annihilation of the Klingon people! We demand the extradition of Kirk! We demand justice!
SAREK: Klingon justice is a unique point of view, Mister President. ...Genesis was perfectly named. The creation of life not death. The Klingons shed the first blood while attempting to possess its secrets.
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: Vulcans are well known as the intellectual puppets of this Federation!
SAREK: Your vessel did destroy U.S.S. Grissom. Your men did kill Kirk's son. Do you deny these events?
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: We deny nothing! We have the right to preserve our race!
SAREK: Do you have the right to commit murder?
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Silence! Silence! There will be no further outbursts from the floor.
SAREK: Mister President, I have come to speak on behalf of the accused.
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: Personal bias! His son was saved by Kirk!
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Mister Ambassador, with all respect, the Council's deliberations are over.
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: Then Kirk goes unpunished?
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Admiral Kirk has been charged with nine violations of Starfleet regulations.
KLINGON AMBASSADOR: Starfleet regulations? That's outrageous! Remember this well. There shall be no peace as long as Kirk lives!
Captain's log, stardate 8390. We are in the third month of our Vulcan exile. And it was Doctor McCoy with a fine sense of historical irony, who decided on a name for our captured Klingon vessel.
('HMS BOUNTY' is roughly painted in large red capital letters along the side of the Bird-of-Prey)

Captain's log. (continued) ...And like those mutineers of five hundred years ago, we too have a hard choice to make.
[Vulcan - Bird-of-Prey on landing pad]

KIRK: Doctor McCoy?
McCOY: Aye sir.
KIRK: Mister Scott?
SCOTT: Aye sir.
KIRK: Uhura?
UHURA: Aye sir.
KIRK: Chekov?
CHEKOV: Aye sir.
KIRK: Sulu?
SULU: Aye sir.
KIRK: Let the record show that the commander and the crew of the late Starship Enterprise have voted unanimously to return to Earth to face the consequences of their actions in the rescue of their comrade, Captain Spock. ...Thank you all. ...Repair stations, please.
KIRK: Mister Scott!
SCOTT: Aye sir?
KIRK: How soon can we be underway?
SCOTT: Give me one more day, sir. Damage control is easy. Reading Klingon, That's hard.
McCOY: You'd think they could at least send a ship. It's bad enough to be court marshalled and spend the rest of our lives mining borite, ...but to go home in this Klingon flea trap...
KIRK: We could learn a thing or two from this flea trap. It's got a cloaking device that cost us a lot.
McCOY: I just wish we could cloak the stench.
[Spock's Test Chamber]

SPOCK: Computer. Resume testing. ...T'plana-Hath, matron of Vulcan philosophy
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: What is the molecular formula of aluminum sulfide crystal?
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...White Queen to section five, grid six. Queen takes Knight. Rook takes Queen. White pawn to section five, grid seven, pawn takes rook. Checkmate.
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...Correct. What significant contribution to bioengineering was made on the Loonkerian outpost on Klendth?
SPOCK: The universal atmospheric element compensator.
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: Evaluate and conclude. A starship's sensors indicate it is being pursued so closely that it occupies the same space as its pursuer.
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...Correct. Identify object and it's cultural significance.
SPOCK: Klingon mummification glyph.
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: What was the principle historical event on the planet Earth in the year nineteen eighty-seven?
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...Correct. What is Kiri-kin-tha's first law of metaphysics?
SPOCK: Nothing unreal exists.
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...Correct. Adjust the sine wave of this magnetic envelope so that anti-neutrons can pass through it but anti-gravitons cannot.
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...Correct. What is the electronic configuration of gadolinium?
TEST COMPUTER VOICE: ...Correct. How do you feel? ...How do you feel?
SPOCK: I do not understand the question.
AMANDA: What is it, Spock?
SPOCK: I do not understand the question, Mother.
AMANDA: You're half human. The computer knows that.
SPOCK: The question is irrelevant.
AMANDA: Spock, ...the retraining of your mind has been in the Vulcan way, so you may not understand feelings. But as my son, you have them. They will surface.
SPOCK: As you wish, since you deem them of value. But I cannot wait here to find them.
AMANDA: Where must you go?
SPOCK: I must go to Earth. To offer testimony.
AMANDA: You do this ...for friendship?
SPOCK: I do it because I was there,
AMANDA: Spock. Does the good of the many outweigh the good of the one?
SPOCK: I would accept that as an axiom.
AMANDA: Then you stand here alive because of a mistake ...made by your flawed, feeling, human friends. They have sacrificed their futures because they believed that the good of the one, ...you, ...was more important to them.
SPOCK: Humans make illogical decisions.
AMANDA: They do, indeed.
[Saratoga bridge]

SARATOGA HELMSMAN: Here it comes now.
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: What's causing that?
SARATOGA SCIENCE OFFICER: Their call is being carried on an amplification wave of enormous power!
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Can you isolate the wave?
SARATOGA SCIENCE OFFICER: Negative. It's impacting on all our systems!
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Yellow Alert! Shields up. Helm, reduce closing speed!
SARATOGA HELMSMAN: Thruster controls have been neutralised!
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Emergency Thrusters!
SARATOGA HELMSMAN: No response, Captain!
SARATOGA CAPTAIN (OC): Emergency lights! ...Damage report!
SARATOGA SCIENCE OFFICER: All systems have failed. ...We are functioning on reserve power only.
SARATOGA CAPTAIN: Starfleet Command, this is Saratoga. Can you hear me? Come in, please. ...Come in, please.
[Starfleet Command]

STARFLEET AIDE: Thank you, sir.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Status report, Admiral!
CARTWRIGHT: Mister President, the Probe is headed directly for us, The signal is damaging everything in its path. The Klingons have lost two vessels. Two starships and three smaller vessels have been neutralised.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Neutralised? How?
CARTWRIGHT: We don't know. Get me the Yorktown.
YORKTOWN CAPTAIN: (on viewscreen) Emergency channel zero one three zero. Code red. It has been three hours since our contact with the alien Probe. All attempts at regaining power have failed.
CARTWRIGHT: It's using forms of energy we do not understand.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: Can you protect us?
CARTWRIGHT: We are launching everything we have.
YORKTOWN CAPTAIN: (on viewscreen) Our systems engineers are trying to deploy a makeshift solar-sail. We have high hopes that this will, if successful, generate power to keep us alive.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Systems report. Communications?
UHURA: Communications systems all ready, sir. Communications officer is as ready as she'll ever be.
KIRK: Mister Sulu?
SULU: Guidance is functional. Onboard computer will interface with Federation memory bank.
KIRK: Weapons systems?
CHEKOV: Operational, Admiral. Cloaking device now available on all flight modes.
KIRK: I'm impressed, A lot of effort for a short voyage.
CHEKOV: We are in an enemy wessel, sir. I didn't wish to be shot down on the way to our own funeral.
KIRK: Most prudent. ...Engine room. Report, Mister Scott.
[Bird-of-Prey engineering]

SCOTT: We're ready, sir. I've converted the dilithium sequencer into something a little less primitive. And Admiral, ...I have replaced the Klingon food packs. They was givin' me sour stomach.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Oh, is that what it was? ...Prepare for departure. Everybody not going to Earth had better get off. Saavik, ...this is goodbye.
SAAVIK: Yes sir.
KIRK: Thank you.
SAAVIK: Sir. I have not had the opportunity to tell you about your son. David died most bravely. He saved Spock. He saved us all. ...I thought you should know. ...Good day, Captain Spock. ...May your journey be free of incident.
SPOCK: Live long and prosper, Lieutenant. ...Permission to come aboard.
KIRK: Permission granted.
SPOCK: Thank you, Admiral.
KIRK: Jim, Spock! Jim! Don't you remember?
SPOCK: It would not be proper to refer to you as Jim while you are in command, Admiral. ...Also, I must apologise for my attire. ...I seem to have misplaced my uniform.
KIRK: Station.
McCOY: Are you sure this is such a bright idea?
KIRK: What do you mean?
McCOY: Him? I mean him, back at his post, like nothing happened. I don't know if you've got the whole picture but he isn't exactly working on all thrusters.
KIRK: It'll come back to him.
McCOY: Are you sure? ...That's what I thought.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, ...take us home.
SULU: Thrusters functional. ...One-quarter impulse power
[Spacedock]

STARFLEET VOICE: (on intercom) Spacedock, this is Starfleet Command. Launch all vessels. Launch all vessels.
CONTROLLER #2: Sir! Spacedock doors are inoperative! All emergency systems are non-functional.
CONTROLLER #1: Engage reserve power.
CONTROLLER #2: Aye sir.
CONTROLLER #1: Starfleet Command, this is Spacedock on emergency channel. We have lost all internal power.
(the Probe over Earth is disturbing the oceans and the weather)

[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

SULU: Estimating Planet Earth, one point six hours present speed.
KIRK: Continue on course. Chekov, any signs of Federation escort?
CHEKOV: No sir. And no Federation wessels on assigned patrol stations.
KIRK: That's odd. Uhura, what's on the com channels?
UHURA: Very active, sir. Multi-phasic transmissions, overlapping. It's almost a gibberish. I will see if I can sort it out.
McCOY: Hi. ...Busy?
SPOCK: Uhura is busy. I am monitoring.
McCOY: Umm. Well, I just wanted to say it sure is nice to have your katra back in your head, not mine. What I mean is I may have carried your soul, but I sure couldn't fill your shoes.
SPOCK: My shoes.
McCOY: Forget it! ...Perhaps we could cover a little philosophical ground? Life, Death, Life. Things of that nature?
SPOCK: I did not have time on Vulcan to review the philosophical disciplines.
McCOY: Come on Spock, it's me, McCoy! You really have gone where no man has gone before. Can't you tell me what it felt like?
SPOCK: It would be impossible to discuss the subject without a common frame of reference.
McCOY: You're joking!
SPOCK: A joke is a story with a humorous climax.
McCOY: You mean I have to die to discuss your insights on death?
SPOCK: Forgive me, Doctor, I am receiving a number of distress calls.
McCOY: I don't doubt it!
[Starfleet Command]

(the Probe is affecting Earth's oceans and weather more violently)
STARFLEET COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: Juneau, Alaska, clouds increasing to ninety-five percent!
STARFLEET DISPLAY OFFICER: Tokyo, total cloud coverage. All power is from reserve banks. Leningrad has lost all electrical power. Cloud cover one hundred percent. Temperatures decreasing rapidly.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: What is the estimated cloud cover of the Planet exactly?
COMPUTER VOICE: Seventy-eight point six percent.
CARTWRIGHT: Notify all stations. Starfleet Emergency, RED ALERT. Switch power immediately to planetary reserves. ...Mister President, even with planetary reserves we cannot survive without the sun.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: I am well aware of that, Admiral. Ambassador Sarek, I'm afraid you're trapped her with us. There seems to be no way we can answer this Probe.
SAREK: It is difficult to answer when one does not understand the question. ...Mister President, perhaps you should transmit a planet distress signal, ...while we still have time.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

UHURA: Admiral?
KIRK: What is it?
UHURA: Overlapping distress calls, and now a message coming in from the Federation.
KIRK: On screen!
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (on viewscreen): This is the President of the United Federation of Planets. Do not approach Earth!
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): The transmissions of an orbiting Probe are causing critical damage to this planet.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (on viewscreen): It has almost totally ionised our atmosphere.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): All power sources have failed. All orbiting starships are powerless. The Probe is vaporising our oceans.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (on viewscreen): We cannot survive unless a way can be found to respond to the Probe. Further communications may not be possible
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (OC): Save your energy, Save yourselves.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT (on viewscreen): Avoid the Planet Earth at all costs. ...Farewell.
KIRK: Uhura, let's hear the Probe's transmissions.
UHURA: Yes sir. ...On speakers.
KIRK: Spock? What do you make of that?
SPOCK: Most unusual. An unknown form of energy of great power and intelligence. Evidently unaware that its transmissions are disruptive. I find it illogical that its intentions could be hostile.
McCOY: Well, dammit? You think this is its way of saying 'Hi there' to the people of the Earth?
SPOCK: There are other forms on intelligence on Earth, Doctor. Only human arrogance would assume the message must be meant for man.
KIRK: You're suggesting the transmission is meant for lifeform other than man?
SPOCK: It is a possibility, Admiral. The President did say that it was directed at Earth's oceans
KIRK: Uhura, ...can you modify the Probe's signals accounting for density and temperature and salinity factors?
UHURA: I'll try, sir. ...I think I have it.
KIRK: And this is what it would sound like underwater?
UHURA: Yes sir.
SPOCK: Fascinating. If my suspicion is correct, there can be no response to this message.
KIRK: Where are you going?
SPOCK: To test my theory.
KIRK: Bones, you stay here.
McCOY: No way, ...somebody's gotta keep an eye on him!
[Bird-of-Prey computer room]

KIRK: Spock?
SPOCK: As suspected, the Probe's transmissions are the songs sung by whales.
KIRK: Whales?
SPOCK: Specifically, humpback whales.
McCOY: That's crazy! Who would send a Probe hundreds of light years to talk to a whale?
KIRK: It's possible. Whales have been on Earth far earlier than man.
SPOCK: Ten million years earlier. And humpbacks were heavily hunted by man. They've been extinct since the twenty-first century. It is possible that an alien intelligence sent the Probe to determine why they lost contact.
McCOY: My God!
KIRK: Spock, could the humpback's answer to this call be simulated?
SPOCK: The sounds, but not the language. We would be responding in gibberish.
KIRK: Does the species exist on any other planet?
SPOCK: Negative. Humpbacks were indigenous to Earth. Earth of the past.
KIRK: Then we have no choice. We must destroy the Probe before it destroys Earth.
SPOCK: To attempt to do so would be futile, Admiral. The Probe could render us neutral easily.
KIRK: But we can't turn away! ...There must be an alternative?
SPOCK: There is one possibility, but I cannot guarantee its success. We could attempt to find some humpback whales.
McCOY: You just said there aren't any, except on Earth of the past.
SPOCK: Yes Doctor, that's exactly what I said.
McCOY: Well, in that case... Now wait just a damn minute!
KIRK: Spock, start your computations for time warp. ...Bones, you come with me.
[Starfleet Command]

COMPUTER VOICE: RED ALERT! RED ALERT! RED ALERT!
STARFLEET COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: Admiral, we need that power to keep the medical and emergency systems functioning.
STARFLEET COMMUNICATIONS ENSIGN: All underground storage systems have been shut down.
COMPUTER VOICE: RED ALERT! RED ALERT! ...RED ALERT! RED ALERT!
(the chaotic scene continues as engineers try to reinforce a large window)
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

KIRK: Scotty, how long is this bay?
SCOTT: About sixty feet, Admiral.
KIRK: Can you enclose it to hold water?
SCOTT: I suppose I could. Are you planning to take a swim?
McCOY: Off the deep end, Mister Scott.
KIRK: Scotty, we've got to find some humpbacks.
SCOTT: Humpbacked ...people?
KIRK: Whales, Mister Scott, whales! Forty-five to fifty feet long, about forty tons each.
[Bird-of-Prey corridor]

McCOY: Are you really going to try this time travel in this rust bucket?
KIRK: We've done it before.
McCOY: Sure, slingshot around the sun. If you pick up enough speed you're in time warp. If you don't, you fry.
KIRK: Would you prefer to do nothing?
McCOY: I'd prefer a dose of common sense. You are proposing to head backwards in time, find humpback whales, then bring them forward in time, drop them off, and hope to hell they tell this Probe what to do with itself!
KIRK: That's the general idea.
McCOY: That's crazy!
KIRK: You have a better idea, now's the time.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: The computations, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: In progress, Admiral.
KIRK: Uhura. Get me through to Starfleet Command.
[Starfleet Command]

COMPUTER VOICE: RED ALERT!
STARFLEET COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: I'm picking up a faint transmission, ...I think it's Admiral Kirk calling!
CARTWRIGHT: On screen!
KIRK (on viewscreen): Starfleet Command. This is Admiral James T. Kirk. ...We have intercepted and analysed the call of the Probe.
CARTWRIGHT: Go to reserve power. ...Now!
KIRK (on viewscreen): It is our opinion that humpback whales can give a proper response to the Probe.
CARTWRIGHT: Stabilise! Emergency reserve!
STARFLEET COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER (OC): Emergency reserve.
KIRK (on viewscreen): We are going to attempt time-travel. We are computing our trajectory at this time.
CARTWRIGHT: Get him back! Get him back!
(the large window starts to collapse)
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

SPOCK: Ready to engage computer, Admiral.
KIRK: What is our target in time?
SPOCK: Late twentieth century.
KIRK: Surely you can be more specific.
SPOCK: Not with this equipment. I have had to programme some of the variables from memory.
KIRK: What are some of the variables?
SPOCK: Availability of fuel components, mass of the vessel through a time continuum, and the probable location of humpback whales, in this case, the Pacific basin.
KIRK: You've programmed that from memory?
SPOCK: I have.
McCOY: Angels and ministers of grace, defend us.
SPOCK: Hamlet, Act one scene four.
KIRK: No doubts about your memory. Engage computer. Prepare for warp speed. ...Shields, Mister Chekov.
CHEKOV: Shields, aye.
KIRK: May fortune favour the foolish? ...Warp speed, Mister Sulu!
SULU: Warp two, ...warp three.
KIRK: Steady as she goes.
SULU: Warp four, ... warp five, ...warp six, ...warp seven, warp eight.
CHEKOV: Heat shields at maximum.
SULU: Warp nine! ...Nine point two, ...nine point three.
KIRK: We need breakaway speed!
SULU: Nine point five, nine point six, nine point seven, nine point eight.
KIRK: Now, Mister Sulu!
(after the slingshot around the sun, ethereal voices)
UHURA: I should never have left him.
McCOY: Jim, where are we?
KIRK: You're talking about the end of everybody on Earth.
(the crew awake from the time-travel)
KIRK: Mister Sulu? ...Mister Sulu! ...Mister Sulu.
SULU: Aye sir?
KIRK: What is our condition?
SULU: Sir, ...the braking thrusters have fired.
KIRK: Picture, please. ...Earth. ...But when? ...Spock?
SPOCK: Judging by the pollution content of the atmosphere, I believe we have arrived at the latter half of the twentieth century.
KIRK: Well done, Spock.
SPOCK: Admiral, if I may, we're probably already visible to the tracking devices of the time.
KIRK: Quite right, Mister Spock. Engage cloaking device, Mister Chekov.
SULU: We are crossing the terminator into night.
SPOCK: Homing in on the west coast of North America.
UHURA: Admiral, I am receiving whale song.
KIRK: Put them on speakers.
UHURA: Admiral, this is strange. The song is directly ahead. It's coming from San Francisco.
KIRK: From the city? That doesn't make sense.
[Bird-of-Prey engineering]

SCOTT: Admiral, we have a serious problem. Would you please come down? It's these Klingon crystals, Admiral. The time-travel drained them. They're giving out. De-crystallising.
KIRK: Give me a round figure, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Oh, twenty-four hours, give or take, staying cloaked. After that, Admiral, we're visible, ...and dead in the water. In any case, we won't have enough to break out of Earth's gravity, to say nothing of getting back home.
KIRK: I can't believe we've come this far only to be stopped by this! Is there no way to re-crystallise dilithium?
SCOTT: Sorry, sir. We can't even do that in the twenty-third century.
SPOCK: Admiral, there may be a twentieth century possibility.
KIRK: Explain.
SPOCK: If memory serves, there was a dubious flirtation with nuclear fission reactors resulting in toxic side effects. By the beginning of the fusion era, these reactors had been replaced, but at this time, we may be able to find some.
KIRK: I thought you said they were toxic.
SPOCK: We could construct a device to collect their high-energy photons safely. These photons could then be injected into the dilithium chamber, causing crystalline restructure. ...Theoretically.
KIRK: Where would we find these reactors, ...theoretically?
SPOCK: Nuclear power was widely used in naval vessels.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

SULU: San Francisco. I was born there.
McCOY: It doesn't look all that different.
KIRK: Set us down in Golden Gate Park.
SULU: Aye sir. Descending.
KIRK: We'll divide into teams. Uhura and Chekov are assigned to the uranium problem.
CHEKOV: Yes sir.
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, you, Mister Scott and Commander Sulu will convert us a whale tank.
McCOY: Oh, joy.
KIRK: While Captain Spock and I will attempt to trace these whale songs to their source.
UHURA: I'll have bearing and distance for you, sir.
KIRK: I want you all to be very careful. This is terra incognita. Many of their customs will doubtless take us by surprise. It's a forgone conclusion that none of these people have ever seen an extra-terrestrial before.
(Spock tears off part of his robe and ties it round his forehead and over his ears)
KIRK: This is an extremely primitive and paranoid culture. Mister Chekov will issue a phaser and communicator to each team. We'll maintain radio silence except in emergencies. Those of you in uniform, remove your rank insignia. Any questions? All right, let's do our job and get out of here. Our own world is waiting for us to save it ...if we can. Commence landing procedure.
SULU: Aye sir.
[Golden Gate Park]

GARBAGE MAN #1: You don't mean to tell me you two were fighting again. I thought you made it up with her last night. Why are you two always fighting?
GARBAGE MAN #2: I like the way she fights! Anyway I said to her, 'If you think I'm going to spend sixty dollars for a goddam toaster oven, you're out of you're mind'.
GARBAGE MAN #2: What did she say to that?
GARBAGE MAN #1: Well...
(a 'wind' blows the dustbins around and one gets flattened and they catch a glimpse of the landing ramp opening)
GARBAGE MAN #1: What the hell was that?
GARBAGE MAN #2: Did you see that?
GARBAGE MAN #1: No. And neither did you, so shut up.
KIRK: Bearing to the whales?
UHURA: Two eight three degrees, ...fifteen point two kilometres.
KIRK: Everyone remember where we parked.
[San Francisco - downtown]

CAR DRIVER: Why don't you watch were you're going, dumb ass!
KIRK: Double dumb ass on you!
McCOY: It's a miracle these people ever got out of the twentieth century.
KIRK: They're still using money. We've got to find some.
KIRK: Spock! The rest of you stay here. ...The rest of you break up. You look like a cadet review.
[Antique store]

ANTIQUE STORE OWNER: Yes, they're eighteenth century American, quite valuable. Are you sure you want to part with them?
KIRK: How much will you give me for them?
SPOCK: Excuse me, weren't those a birthday present from Doctor McCoy?
KIRK: And they will be again, that's the beauty of it. How much?
ANTIQUE STORE OWNER: Well, they'd be worth more if the lenses were intact. I'll give you one hundred dollars.
KIRK: Is that a lot?
[San Francisco - downtown]

KIRK: That's all there is. Don't splurge. All set? Good hunting. ...Well, Spock, here we are, thanks to your restored memory and a little bit of good luck, we're walking the streets of San Francisco looking for a couple of humpback whales. How do you propose to solve this minor problem?
SPOCK: Simple logic will suffice. I believe I shall begin by making use of this map. I have the distance and bearing which were provided by Commander Uhura. If we juxtapose our coordinates we should be able to find our destination. It lies at two eight three point seven degrees...
(a bus with an advertisement on the side pulls up)
KIRK: I think we'll find what we're looking for at the Cetacean Institute in Sausalito. A pair of humpbacks named George and Gracie.
SPOCK: How do you know this?
KIRK: Simple logic.
(they attempt to board the bus)
SPOCK: What does it mean, 'Exact change'?
(Kirk and Spock start to walk)
[San Francisco - another street]

McCOY: Would you mind telling me how we plan to convert this tank?
SCOTT: Ordinarily, I could do it with a piece of transparent aluminum.
SULU: I'm afraid you're a number of years too early for that.
SCOTT: I know. We've got to find the twentieth century equivalent.
McCOY: But where?
[San Francisco - elsewhere]

(Uhura and Chekov at a phone booth)
UHURA: Did you find it?
CHEKOV: Yes, under 'U.S. Government.' Now we need directions. ...Excuse me, sir. Can you direct me to the Navy base in Alameda? It's where they keep the nuclear wessels. ...Nuc-le-ar wes-sels.
UHURA: Excuse us!
CHEKOV: Excuse me. We are looking for nuclear wessels.
UHURA: Can you tell me where the naval base is in Alameda?
CHEKOV: Hello! We are looking for the nuclear wessels in Alameda. Could you tell me where...
UHURA: Can you help us?
CHEKOV: We are looking for the naval base in Alameda. Could you tell me where the nuclear wessels are?
PASSER-BY: Oh, I don't know if I know the answer to that. I think it's across the bay in Alameda.
CHEKOV: That's what I said. Alameda.
UHURA: Alameda.
CHEKOV: I know that!
UHURA: But where is Alameda?
[On a bus]

KIRK: Excuse me! ...Excuse me! Would you mind stopping that noise?
(a punk turns up his ghetto blaster sound)
KIRK: Excuse me! Would you mind stopping that damn noise?
(Spock gives the punk a nerve pinch, stopping the noise and gains a round of applause from the bus)
SPOCK: Admiral, may I ask you a question?
KIRK: Spock, don't call me Admiral. ...You used to call me Jim. Don't you remember? Jim. ...What's your question?
SPOCK: Your use of language has altered since our arrival. It is currently laced with, ...shall I say, ...more colourful metaphors. 'Double dumb ass on you' ...and so forth.
KIRK: You mean profanity. That's simply the way they talk here. Nobody pays any attention to you if you don't swear every other word. You'll find it in all the literature of the period.
SPOCK: For example?
KIRK: Oh, the collective works of Jacqueline Susann. The novels of Harold Robbins.
SPOCK: Ah! ...'The giants'.
[Cetacean Institute]

TANNOY VOICE: The next showing of 'The Wonderful World of Whales' will begin in five minutes in the marine theater.
GILLIAN: Here I go. ...Good morning. I'm your guide this morning, my name is Doctor Gillian Taylor, but you can call me Gillian. I'm Assistant Director of the Maritime Cetacean Institute. So please follow me and just give a yell if you can't hear me, okay? ...The Cetacean Institute is the only museum in the world exclusively devoted to whales. As you can see we have a great deal to offer, but that is small compared to what we know, ...or rather what we don't know, about whales. The first commonly held misconception is that whales are fish. They're not, they're mammals just like you and me. Warm-blooded, needing air to breathe and producing milk to nurse their young.
MAN: Do whales attack people ...like in 'Moby Dick'?
GILLIAN: No. ...No, most whales don't even have teeth. They have a soft gum-like tissue that strains vast amounts of tiny shrimp for food and that is the limit of their hostility. Unfortunately, their principle enemy is far, far more aggressive.
KIRK: You mean man.
GILLIAN: To put it mildly. Since the dawn of time, men have harvested whales for a variety of purposes, most of which can be achieved synthetically at this point. One hundred years ago, using hand-thrown harpoons, man did plenty of damage, ...but that is nothing compared to what he has achieved in this century. ...This is mankind's legacy, whales hunted to the brink of extinction. Virtually gone is the blue whale, the largest creature ever to inhabit the Earth. Despite all attempts at banning whaling, there are still countries and pirates currently engaged in the slaughter of these inoffensive creatures. Where the humpback whale once numbered in the hundreds of thousands, today there are less than ten thousand specimens alive and those that are taken are no longer fully grown. In addition, many of the females are killed, while still bearing unborn calves.
SPOCK: To hunt a species to extinction is not logical.
GILLIAN: Whoever said the human race was logical? ...Now if you'll follow me, please, I'll introduce you to the Institute's pride and joy.
[Whale tank - outside]

GILLIAN: This is the largest seawater tank in the world. It contains the only two humpback whales in captivity. ...They are mature humpbacks, weighing forty-five thousand pounds each. They wandered into San Francisco Bay as calves and were brought here. We call them George and Gracie.
KIRK: It's perfect, Spock. A male and a female in a contained space. We beam them up together and consider ourselves lucky.
GILLIAN: Beautiful, aren't they? And extremely intelligent. ...Now if you'll follow me please.
[Whale tank - inside]

GILLIAN: Despite all the things that they are teaching us we have to return George and Gracie to the open sea.
KIRK: Why's that?
GILLIAN: Well, for one thing, we simply don't have enough money to keep feeding them two of tons of shrimp a day!
KIRK: How soon?
GILLIAN: Soon. ...It's too bad because they're really quite friendly, as you can see. I've grown quite attached to them. ...And now, here's a much better way to see George and Gracie ...underwater.
[Whale tank - the underwater window]

GILLIAN: What you're hearing is recorded whale song. It is sung by the male. He'll sing anywhere from six to as long as thirty minutes, and then, start again. In the ocean, the other whales will pick up the song, and pass it on.
(Spock is seen swimming in the underwater tank)
GILLIAN: The songs change every year, but we still don't know what purpose they serve. Are they some kind of navigational signal? Could they be part of the mating ritual? Or is it pure communication beyond our comprehension? Frankly we just don't know
OLDER WOMAN: Maybe he's singing to that man.
GILLIAN: What the hell! ...Excuse me! Wait right here!
[Whale tank - outside]

GILLIAN: Excuse me, please! ...Who the hell are you? What were you doing in there?
KIRK: Yes, speak up!
SPOCK: Attempting the hell to communicate.
GILLIAN: Communicate? Communicate what? You have no right to be here!
KIRK: You heard the lady!
SPOCK: Admiral, if we were to assume these whales are ours to do with as we please, we would be as guilty as those who caused their extinction.
GILLIAN: Okay. I don't know what this is all about, but I want you guys out of here right now or I call the cops.
KIRK: I assure you that won't be necessary. We were only trying to help.
GILLIAN: The hell you were, buster. Your friend was messing up my whales.
SPOCK: They like you very much. But they are not the hell your whales.
GILLIAN: I ...I suppose they told you that? Huh!
SPOCK: The hell they did.
GILLIAN: Right!
[Road near the Cetacean Institute]

KIRK: Spock.
SPOCK: Yes?
KIRK: About those colourful metaphors we discussed. I don't think you should try to use them any more.
SPOCK: Why not?
KIRK: Well, for one thing, you haven't quite got the knack of it.
SPOCK: I see.
KIRK: And another thing, it is not always necessary to tell the truth.
SPOCK: I cannot tell a lie.
KIRK: I don't mean lie, ...but you could exaggerate.
SPOCK: Exaggerate.
KIRK: Exaggerate! You've done it before. Can't you remember?
SPOCK: The hell I can't
KIRK: What else did you learn from your mind-meld?
SPOCK: They're unhappy about the way their species has been treated by man.
KIRK: They have a right to be. Are they going to help us?
SPOCK: I believe I was successful in communicating our intentions.
KIRK: I see.
[Whale tank - outside]

GILLIAN: (to the whales) It's all right. Yes. I know. It's okay. They didn't mean any harm.
BOB: Heard there was some excitement.
GILLIAN: Oh, just a couple of kooks.
BOB: How you doing?
GILLIAN: I'm fine.
BOB: Don't tell me your fish stories, kiddo. I've known you too long.
GILLIAN: Bob, ...it's tearing me apart. Okay?
BOB: I know. I feel the same thing, but we're between a rock and a hard place. If we can't keep them here without risking their lives. We can't let them go without a taking the same chance.
GILLIAN: I know, I know.
BOB: And besides we're not talking about human beings here. It's never been proven their intelligence is anyw...
GILLIAN: Oh, come on Bob. I don't know about you, but my compassion for someone is not limited to my estimate of their intelligence.
[Alameda Naval Base]

CHEKOV: Team leader, this is team two. Come in, please.
UHURA: I have the coordinates of the reactor.
KIRK (on intercom): Kirk here.
CHEKOV: Admiral, we have found the nuclear wessel.
KIRK (on intercom): Well done, you two!
CHEKOV: And Admiral, ... it is the Enterprise!
[Road near the Cetacean Institute]

KIRK: Understood. What's your plan?
[Alameda Naval Base]

CHEKOV: We will beam in tonight, collect the photons and beam out. No one will ever know we were there.
[Road near the Cetacean Institute]

KIRK: Understood and approved. Keep me informed. Kirk out. ...There she is, from the Institute. If we play our cards right, we may be able to find out when those whales are leaving.
SPOCK: How will playing cards help?
GILLIAN (OC): Well, if it isn't Robin Hood and Friar Tuck.
GILLIAN: Where're you fellahs heading?
KIRK: Back to San Francisco.
GILLIAN: Came all the way down here to jump in and swim with the kiddies, huh?
KIRK: There's very little point in my trying to explain.
GILLIAN: Yeah, I'll buy that. What about him?
KIRK: Him? He's harmless. Back in the sixties he was part of the Free Speech movement at Berkeley. I think he had a little too much LDS.
GILLIAN: LDS? ...Come on then, lemme give you a lift. I have a notorious weakness for hard luck cases, that's why I work with whales.
KIRK: We don't want to be any trouble.
GILLIAN: You've already been that. C'mon.
[Cab of Gillian's pick-up)
]

KIRK: Well, thank you very much.
GILLIAN: Don't mention it. And don't try anything either. I got a tire iron right where I can get at it.
GILLIAN: So, ...you were at ...Berkeley?
SPOCK: I was not.
KIRK: Memory problems, too.
GILLIAN: What about you? Where are you from?
KIRK: Iowa.
GILLIAN: Oh, a landlubber. Come on, what the hell were you guys really trying to do back there? It wasn't some kinda macho thing, was it? Because if that's all, I'll be real disappointed. I really hate that macho stuff.
KIRK: Can I ask you a question?
GILLIAN: Go ahead.
KIRK: What's going to happen when you release the whales?
GILLIAN: They're gonna have to take their chances.
KIRK: What does that mean, exactly? Take their chances.
GILLIAN: It means that they will be at risk from whale hunters ...same as the rest of the humpbacks. ...What did you mean when you said all that stuff back at the Institute about extinction?
SPOCK: I meant...
KIRK: He meant what you said on the tour, that if things keep going the way they are, humpbacks will disappear forever.
GILLIAN: That's not what he said, farm boy. 'Admiral, if we were to assume those whales are ours to do with as we please, we would be as guilty as those who caused' ...past tense... 'their extinction.' ...I have a photographic memory. I see words.
SPOCK: Are you sure it isn't time for a colourful metaphor?
GILLIAN: You're not one of those guys from the military, are you? Trying to teach whales to retrieve torpedoes, or some dipshit stuff like that?
KIRK: No, ma'am. No dipshit.
GILLIAN: Well, good, that's one thing. I'da let you off right here.
SPOCK: Gracie is pregnant.
(the pick-up screams to a halt)
GILLIAN: All right. Who are you? And don't jerk me around any more. I want to know how you know that.
KIRK: We can't tell you that. ...Please, let me finish. I can tell you that we're not in the military and that we intend no harm towards the whales.
GILLIAN: Then what...
KIRK: In fact, we may be able to help you in ways that, frankly, you couldn't possibly imagine.
GILLIAN: Or believe, I'll bet.
KIRK: Very likely. ...You're not exactly catching us at our best.
SPOCK: That much is certain.
KIRK: I have got a hunch we'd all be a lot happier discussing this over dinner. What do you say?
GILLIAN: You guys like Italian?
SPOCK/KIRK: No. Yes. No. Yes.
KIRK: Yes, I love Italian and so do you.
SPOCK: Yes.
[Plexicorp Factory - inside]

NICHOLS: Professor Scott, I'm Doctor Nichols, plant manager. I'm terribly sorry but there's been an awful mix-up Would you believe I was never told about your visit?
McCOY: I tried to clear things up, Professor Scott. I explained you'd come all the way her from Edinburgh on appointment to study methods of manufacturing by Plexicorp, but they don't seem to know anything about it.
SCOTT: Don't know anything about it? I find it hard to believe that I've come millions of miles.
McCOY: Thousands! Thousands!
SCOTT: Thousands of miles on an invited tour of inspection, only to be...
NICHOLS: Professor Scott, if you'll just...
SCOTT: I demand to see the owners! I demand...
McCOY: Professor Scott, just take it easy! Doctor Nichols has offered to take us around the plant personally.
SCOTT: He has?
NICHOLS: With pleasure.
SCOTT: Well, that's different.
NICHOLS: Gregory!
(a forklift drives up)
NICHOLS: Professor...
SCOTT: May my assistant join us?
NICHOLS: Of course.
McCOY: Don't bury yourself in the part.
[Plexicorp Factory - outside]

PILOT: Hi!
SULU: Hi! A good-looking ship. Huey two oh four, isn't it?
PILOT: Right on. Do you fly?
SULU: Oh, here and there. ...I flew something similar back in my Academy days.
PILOT: All right, then this must be old stuff to you?
SULU: Old, yes. But interesting. ...Do you mind if I ask a few questions?
PILOT: Sure!

[Plexicorp Factory - Nichol's office]

SCOTT: Well, this a fine place you have here, Doctor Nichols.
NICHOLS: Thank you. I must say, Professor, your knowledge of engineering is most impressive.
McCOY: Back home, we call him the miracle worker.
NICHOLS: Indeed. ...May I offer you something, gentlemen?
SCOTT: Doctor Nichols, I may be able to offer something to you.
NICHOLS: Yes?
SCOTT: I notice you're still working with polymers.
NICHOLS: Still? What else would I be working with?
SCOTT: Ah, what else indeed? I'll put it another way. How thick would a piece of your plexiglass need to be, at sixty feet by ten feet to withstand the pressure of eighteen thousand cubic feet of water?
NICHOLS: That's easy, six inches. We carry stuff that big in stock.
SCOTT: Aye, I've noticed. Now suppose, ...just suppose, ...I was to show you a way to manufacture a wall that would do the same job but be only one inch thick. Would that be worth something to you, eh?
NICHOLS: You're joking?
McCOY: Perhaps the professor could use your computer.
NICHOLS: Please.
SCOTT: Computer... Computer!
(McCoy hands him the computer mouse which Scott tries to use as a microphone)
SCOTT: Ah! Hello computer?
NICHOLS: Just use the keyboard.
SCOTT: The keyboard. ...How quaint.
(Scott rapidly types a formula into the computer that appears on the monitor screen)
NICHOLS: Transparent aluminum?
SCOTT: That's the ticket, laddie.
NICHOLS: It would take years just to figure out the dynamics of this matrix.
McCOY: Yes, but you'd be rich beyond the dreams of avarice.
SCOTT: So, is it worth something to you? Or should I just punch up 'clear'.
NICHOLS: No! No! (a female employee comes into the office) ...Not now Madeline! ...What exactly did you have in mind?
McCOY: Well, a moment alone, please. ...Do you realise of course, if we give him the formula, we're altering the future.
SCOTT: Why? How do we know he didn't invent the thing!
McCOY: Yeah!
[Golden Gate Park]

(Gillian's pick-up arrives)
GILLIAN: Sure you won't change your mind?
SPOCK: Is there something wrong with the one I have?
KIRK: Just a little joke. Goodbye, old friend.
GILLIAN: Wait a minute! How did you know Gracie's pregnant? Nobody knows that.
SPOCK: Gracie does. ...I'll be right here.
GILLIAN: Is he just going to hang around the bushes while we eat?
KIRK: It's his way.
(as the pick-up drives off, Spock disappears in a transporter beam)
[Italian restaurant]

GILLIAN: Do you trust me?
KIRK: Implicitly.
GILLIAN: Good. Large mushroom, pepperoni with extra onions and a Michelob, please.
WAITER: Great choice, ...and you, sir?
KIRK: Make that two. ...Well, how does a nice girl like you get to be a cetacean biologist?
GILLIAN: Just lucky, I guess.
KIRK: You're upset about losing the whales aren't you?
GILLIAN: You're very perceptive.
KIRK: How will that be done, exactly?
GILLIAN: They'll be flown in a special seven four seven to Alaska and released there.
KIRK: Flown, ...and that's the last you'll see of them?
GILLIAN: See, yes. But we'll tag them with radio transmitters on a special frequency so we can keep tabs on them.
KIRK: You know, ...I could take those whales somewhere, ...where they'd never be hunted.
GILLIAN: You? You can't even get from Sausalito to San Francisco without a lift.
KIRK: If you have such a low opinion of my abilities, how come we're having dinner?
GILLIAN: I'm a sucker for hard luck cases. ...Cheers! ...Besides, I want to know why you travel around with that ditzy guy who knows that Gracie is pregnant and calls you 'Admiral'. ...Where could you take them?
KIRK: Hm?
GILLIAN: My whales? Where could you take them where they'd be safe?
KIRK: It's not so much a matter of a place as of time.
GILLIAN: The time would have to be right now.
KIRK: Why right now?
GILLIAN: Let's just say that no humpback born in captivity has ever survived. ...The problem is that they won't be that much safer at sea because of all the hunting this time of year. ...So you see, that, as they say, is that... (her eyes begin to moisten) Damn!
(Kirk's communicator beeps)
GILLIAN: What's that?
KIRK: What's what?
GILLIAN: You have a pocket pager? ...Are you a doctor?
(Kirk's communicator beeps again)
KIRK: What is it? I thought I told you not to call me.
SCOTT (on communicator): Sorry, Admiral. I thought you'd like to know, we're beaming them in now.
KIRK: Oh, all right. ...Tell Them phasers on stun. Good luck. Kirk out.
GILLIAN: You wanna try it from the top?
KIRK: Why don't you tell me when those whales are leaving?
GILLIAN: Who are you?
KIRK: Who do you think I am?
GILLIAN: Don't tell me. You're from outer space.
KIRK: No, I'm from Iowa. I only work in outer space.
GILLIAN: Ah! Well, I was close. I mean I knew outer space was going to come into it sooner or later.
KIRK: The truth?
GILLIAN: I'm all ears.
KIRK: Ha, ha, ha...
GILLIAN: Ha, ha, ha...
KIRK: Ha, ha, ha... Okay, the truth. ...I am from what, on your calendar, would be the late twenty-third century. I've come back in time ...to bring two humpback whales with me in an attempt to ...repopulate the species.
GILLIAN: Well, why didn't you just say so? I mean, why all the coy disguises?
KIRK: You want the details?
GILLIAN: Oh! I wouldn't miss this for all the tea in China.
KIRK: When are those whales being released?
GILLIAN: Okay, what the hell! Your friend was right. Gracie is not only pregnant, she is very pregnant ...and at noon tomorrow, ...when there is sure to be a media circus, ...the whales get shipped out.
KIRK: Noon tomorrow!
GILLIAN: Are we leaving?
KIRK: Come on! We don't have much time.
GILLIAN: Uh, ...could we have that to go, please?
WAITER: Sure! Who gets the bad news?
GILLIAN: Don't' tell me they don't use money in the twenty-third century.
KIRK: Well, they don't.
[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

(a dog-patrol and an alsatian seem to sense Uhura and Chekov)
UHURA: How long?
CHEKOV: It depends on how much shielding there is between us and the reactor.
[Golden Gate Park]

GILLIAN: Well, 'Admiral', that was the briefest dinner I've ever had in my life, and certainly the biggest cockamamie fish story I've ever heard.
KIRK: You asked. Now, do tell me something? ...George and Gracie's transmitter. What's the radio frequency?
GILLIAN: Sorry, that's classified. Look, I don't really have a clue who you are. Really! You wouldn't want to show me around your space ship, would you?
KIRK: That wouldn't be my first choice, no.
GILLIAN: Well, there we are.
KIRK: Lemme tell you something. I'm here to bring two humpbacks into the twenty-third century. If I have to, I'll go to the open sea to get them, but I'd much rather have yours. ...Better for me, better for you. It's better for them. ...Think about it
GILLIAN: Who are you?
KIRK: Think about it, but don't take too long. I'm out of time. If you change your mind, this is where I'll be.
GILLIAN: Here, ...in the park?
KIRK: Right.
(Gillian drives off, hears the transporter sound, stops and looks back. Kirk has disappeared)
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

KIRK: Status?
SPOCK: The tank will be finished by morning.
KIRK: That's cutting it closer than you know. What about team two?
SPOCK: No word since beam-in. We can only wait for them to call.
KIRK: Damn. ...Dammit! We've been so lucky. We have the two perfect whales right in our hands, but if we don't move quickly, we'll lose them!
SPOCK: In that event, the probabilities are that our mission would fail.
KIRK: Our mission! You're talking about the end of every life on Earth! You're half human, haven't you got any goddamned feelings about that!!
[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

(Uhura and Chekov anxiously watch progress on gathering the photons as another patrol passes)
[U.S.S. Enterprise C.I.C. room]

RADAR OPERATOR: There it is again.
ELECTRONIC TECHNICIAN: That's too weird. ...Commander.
C.D.O.: I thought you gents were running a test programme.
ELECTRONIC TECHNICIAN: Yes sir, but we are apparently getting a power drain and it must be coming from inside the ship.
C.D.O.: C.I.C., Command Officer Rogerson. Yes, Chief, we're tracking that, too. What do you make of it?

[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

UHURA: Scotty, we're ready for beam out. ...Scotty! Can you hear me?
[U.S.S. Enterprise C.I.C. room]

C.D.O.: Confirmed, Roger that. ...Mardet commanding officer! This is the Command Duty Officer, Commander Rodgerson. We have an intruder in the number four M.M.R. I say again. We have an intruder in the number four M.M.R.
[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

UHURA: Scotty! Did you read?
[Bird-of-Prey transporter room]

UHURA (on communicator): Scotty! ...Scotty!
SCOTT: Lass, I can hardly hear you. ...My transporter power's down to minimal. I've got to bring you in one at a time.
[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

CHEKOV: Take the collector. You go first!
[Bird-of-Prey transporter room]

SCOTT: Stand by.
(Uhura transports out)
[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

CHEKOV: Hello? ...Come in, please. ...Scotty, how soon?
[Bird-of-Prey transporter room]

SCOTT: Chekov, you're breaking up. Please signal again. ...Chekov, can you hear me?
[U.S.S. Enterprise reactor room]

CHEKOV: Scotty! ...Now would be a good time.
MARINE LIEUTENANT: Freeze!
[Bird-of-Prey transporter room]

SCOTT: Chekov! ...I've lost him.
[U.S.S. Enterprise interrogation room]

FBI AGENT: Commander Pavel Chekov, Starfleet, United Federation of Planets. ...Right, Commander, is there anything you wanna tell us?
CHEKOV: Like what?
FBI AGENT: Like who you really are and what you're doing here and what these things here are.
CHEKOV: I am Pavel Chekov. Commander in Starfleet, United Federation of Planets, service number six five six, five eight two seven, D.
FBI AGENT: All right. Let's take it from the top.
CHEKOV: The top of what?
FBI AGENT: Name?
CHEKOV: My name?
FBI AGENT: No, my name.
CHEKOV: I do not know your name.
FBI AGENT: You play games with me, mister, and you're through
CHEKOV: I am? May I go now?
FBI AGENT: What do you think?
CIVILIAN AGENT: He's a Russkie.
FBI AGENT: That is the stupidest thing I have ever heard in my life. Of course he's a russkie, but he's a retard or something.
CIVILIAN AGENT: You'd better call Washington.
CHEKOV: Don't move!
FBI AGENT: Okay. ...Make nice. Give us the ray gun.
CHEKOV: I varn you. If you don't lie on the floor, I vill have to stun you.
FBI AGENT: Go ahead. Stun me.
CHEKOV: I'm wery sorry. ...It must be the radiation.
(Chekov throws the useless phaser to the agent and heads off into the ship)
VOICES: Gangway! ...Hit the deck!
(Chekov goes over the side of the ship and lies comatose)
[Alameda quayside]

MARINE SERGEANT: Man down! Get a corpsman over here.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Any luck?
UHURA: Nothing. Admiral, I should never have left him.
KIRK: You did what was necessary. ...Keep trying to find him. ...Scotty, you promised me an estimate on the dilithium crystals.
[Bird-of-Prey engineering]

SCOTT: It's going slowly, sir. It'll be well into tomorrow.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: That's not good enough, Mister Scott. You've got to do better!
[Bird-of-Prey engineering]

SCOTT: I'll try, sir. Scott out. He's in a wee bit of a snit, isn't he?
SPOCK: He is a man of deep feelings.
SCOTT: Aye, what else is new?
[Cetacean Institute]

(Gillian arrives and finds the tank is empty)
BOB: They left last night. We didn't want a mob scene with the press. It wouldn't have been good for them. Besides ...we thought it would be easier on you this way.
GILLIAN: You sent them away without even letting me say goodbye?
BOB: Gillian.
GILLIAN: You son of a bitch.
[Golden Gate Park]

(Gillian arrives in a hurry to see the Plexicorp helicopter hovering with a sheet of Plexiglass suspended below it)
GILLIAN: Admiral! Admiral Kirk! ...Admiral Kirk!
(Gillian stares in disbelief as the top half Scotty appears and the Plexiglass begins to disappear)
GILLIAN: Admiral! ...Admiral Kirk! ...Admiral Kir...
(Gillian runs across the grass and bumps into the cloaked Bird-of-Prey where its landing footprint can be seen)
GILLIAN: Admiral! ...Admiral! ...Admiral Kirk, can you hear me? They're gone! I need your help. Are you in there?
SCOTT: Admiral, we have problem.
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

GILLIAN (OC): Admiral! ...Admiral Kirk! ...Can you hear me? ...Admiral! ...Admiral Kirk! ...Can you hear me? ...Admiral Kirk! ...Can you hear me? I need your help!

[Golden Gate Park]

GILLIAN: Oh, my God! Aahh...
[Bird-of-Prey transporter room]

KIRK: Hello, Alice. Welcome to wonderland.
GILLIAN: Oh, it's true!
KIRK: Yes, it's true.
GILLIAN: What you said.
KIRK: Yes, it is. I'm glad you're here, but I must admit you picked a helluva time to drop in. ...Take it easy, now. We need your help.
GILLIAN: Is this real?
KIRK: Yes, it's all real. Take a look.
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

KIRK: Storage tanks for your whales. We'll bring them up the same we brought you. It's calle..
GILLIAN: Admiral, they're gone.
KIRK: Gone?
GILLIAN: They were taken last night. I wasn't told. They're in Alaska by now.
KIRK: Damn!
GILLIAN: But they're tagged, like I told you, you can go find them, right?
KIRK: I can't go anywhere.
GILLIAN: What kind of spaceship is this?
KIRK: It's a spaceship with a missing man.
SPOCK: Admiral. Full power has been restored.
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Hello, Doctor. Welcome aboard.
UHURA (OC): Admiral, ...are you there?
KIRK: Yes, Uhura, ...what's wrong?
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

UHURA: I've found Chekov, sir. They're taking him to emergency surgery right now.
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

KIRK: Uhura! ...Where!
UHURA (OC): Mercy Hospital.
KIRK: Mercy Hospital?
GILLIAN: That's in the Mission District.
UHURA (OC): They report his condition as critical.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

UHURA: He is not expected to survive.
McCOY: Jim, you've got to let me go in there! Don't leave him in the hands of twentieth century medicine.
SPOCK: Admiral, may I suggest that Doctor McCoy is correct. We must help Chekov.
KIRK: Is that the logical thing to do, Spock?
SPOCK: No, but is the human thing to do.
KIRK: Right. ...Will you help us?
GILLIAN: How?
McCOY: Well, we're gonna have to look like physicians.
[Mercy Hospital corridors]

KIRK: We'll try down here. You check there.
WOMAN PATIENT: Doctor.
McCOY: What's the matter with you?
WOMAN PATIENT: Kidney ...dialysis.
McCOY: Dialysis? My god, what is this, the Dark Ages? Here, you swallow that. If you have a problem, just call me.
KIRK: Here, I've got it. ...Let's go. ...He's being held in the security corridor one flight up. His condition is critical.
McCOY: Come on.
KIRK: Excuse me, we'll take that! ... Hold the door! Emergency!
(they push the hi-jacked gurney with Gillian on it into the elevator)
[Mercy Hospital Elevator]

INTERN #1: Did you hear anything?
INTERN #2: I was there. I heard the whole thing.
INTERN #1: Weintrub said radical chemotherapy or she's gonna croak. Just like that.
INTERN #2: Well, what about Gottlieb?
INTERN #1: All he talked about was image therapy, or otherwise he'd cut it out.
McCOY: Unbelievable.
INTERN #1: You have a different view, Doctor?
McCOY: It sounds like the goddam Spanish Inquisition.
KIRK: Bad day!
[Mercy Hospital corridor]

McCOY: Out of the way!
POLICEMAN: We have strict orders...
McCOY: Dammit, do you want an acute case on your hands? This woman has immediate post-prandial upper abdominal distension! ...Get out of the way! Get out of the way!
[Mercy Hospital operating room]

KIRK: What did you say she was got?
McCOY: Cramps.
DOCTOR #1: Who are you? Why aren't you masked? Who are these people?
DOCTOR #2: I don't know.
DOCTOR #1: What the hell is that? What are you doing?
McCOY: Tearing of the middle meningeal artery.
DOCTOR #1: What's your degree in, dentistry?
McCOY: How do you explain slowing pulse, low respiratory rate and coma?
DOCTOR: Fundoscopic examination...
McCOY: Fundoscopic examination is unrevealing in these cases!
DOCTOR #1: A simple evacuation of the expanding epidural hematoma will relieve the pressure.
McCOY: My God, man, drilling holes in his head's not the answer. The artery must be repaired. Now put away your butcher knives and let me save this patient before it's too late!
DOCTOR #1: I'm going to have you removed.
KIRK: Doctors! Such unprofessional behaviour. ...Into that little room please.
DOCTOR #1: What is that? A gun?
MEDICAL STAFF: What is this? ...I have no idea!
(Kirk fuses the lock of the little room with his phaser)
DOCTOR #1: He melted the lock!
McCOY: We're dealing with medievalism here! ...Chemotherapy! ...Fundoscopic examinations!
McCOY: Come on, Chekov. Wake up!
KIRK: Pavel, can you hear me?
McCOY: He's coming round, Jim.
KIRK: Pavel, talk to me. ...Name! Rank!
CHEKOV: ...Chekov, ...Pavel, ...Rank, ...Admiral!
[Mercy Hospital corridor]

POLICEMAN #1: How's the patient, Doctor?
KIRK: He's gonna make it!
POLICEMAN #2: He? He went in with a she.
KIRK: One little mistake.
[Mercy Hospital operating room]

DOCTOR #1: Get us out of here! ...They've taken the patient! Get some help!
[Mercy Hospital corridor]

(Kirk, McCoy and Gillian flee, pushing Chekov on the gurney)
POLICEMAN #1: Hold it!
KIRK: Not now, Pavel!
POLICEMAN #1: Hold it! ...Hold it!
WOMAN PATIENT: The doctor gave me a pill and I grew a new kidney.
DOCTOR #3: It's fully functional.
DOCTOR #4: Fully functional?
(the police chase them to an elevator, run down the stairs to find the elevator empty)
[Golden Gate Park]

KIRK: Where would the whales be by now?
GILLIAN: Please, do you have a chart on board? I'll show you.
KIRK: No, no, no. All I need is the radio frequency to track them.
GILLIAN: What are you talking about? I'm coming with you.
KIRK: You can't. Our next stop is the twenty-third century.
GILLIAN: I don't care? I've got nobody here. I have got to help those whales.
KIRK: I have no time to argue with you, or even tell you how much you've meant to us. ...The radio frequency, please.
GILLIAN: The frequency's four oh one megahertz.
KIRK: Thank you, ...for everything. Scotty, beam me up!
GILLIAN: Surprise!
(Gillian leaps, putting her arms around Kirk's neck and transports with him)
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Spock, where the hell is the power you promised me?
SPOCK: One damn minute, Admiral.
SCOTT (OC): I'm ready Spock. Let's go find George and Gracie.
KIRK: Sulu?
SULU: I'm trying to remember how this works. I got used to a Huey.
KIRK: You tricked me.
GILLIAN: You need me.
SULU (OC): Ready, sir.
KIRK: Take a seat. Now, Mister Sulu.
[Golden Gate Park]

JOGGER: What the hell was that!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

CHEKOV (OC): Cloaking device is stable. ...All systems normal.
KIRK (OC): Stabilise Energy Reserve! ...Report helm.
SULU: Maintaining impulse climb. Wing five by zero, helm steady.
KIRK: Advise reaching ten thousand. Steer three one zero.
SULU: Three one zero, aye!
KIRK: Uhura, scan for the whales. four oh one megahertz!
UHURA: Scanning, sir!
SULU: Ten thousand M.S.L., Admiral.
KIRK: Wing to cruise configuration. Full impulse power.
SULU: Aye sir. ...Three one zero to the Bering Sea. E.T.A. twelve minutes.
KIRK: Scotty, are the whale tanks secure?
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

SCOTT: Aye, sir. But I've never beamed up four hundred tons before.
KIRK (OC): Four hundred tons?
SCOTT: It not just the whales, it's the water.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Yes, of course. ...The whales, any contact?
UHURA: Negative, sir.
McCOY: You, ah... You present the appearance of a man with a problem.
SPOCK: Your perception is correct, Doctor. In order to return us to the exact moment at which we left the twenty-third century, I have used our journey back through time as a reference, calculating the coefficient of elapsed time in relation to the acceleration curve.
McCOY: Naturally. So what's your problem?
SPOCK: Acceleration is no longer a constant.
McCOY: Well, then you're gonna have to take your best shot.
SPOCK: Best shot?
McCOY: Guess, Spock. Your best guess.
SPOCK: Guessing is not in my nature, Doctor.
McCOY: Well, ...nobody's perfect.
GILLIAN: That's it. That's it!
UHURA: Affirmative. Contact with the whales.
KIRK: Bearing!
UHURA: Bearing three two seven, range six hundred nautical.
KIRK: Put them on screen!
GILLIAN: How can you do that?
UHURA: On screen! ...Admiral, I have a signal closing in on the whales. Bearing three two eight degrees.
KIRK: Let's see it.
McCOY: What kind of ship is that?
GILLIAN: A whaling ship, Doctor. Are we too late?
KIRK: Full power descent, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Aye sir. Full power descent.
(the whaler, having spotted the whales, loads a harpoon and prepares to fire)
SULU: Ten seconds, sir!
(when one of the whales surfaces the harpoon is fired but it drops into ocean after a metallic clunk. The Bird-of-Prey decloaks causing the whaler to veer off)
KIRK: All right Scotty, it's up to you.
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

SCOTT: Ten seconds, Admiral, five, four, three, two, one. ...Admiral! There be whales here!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Well done, Mister Scott. How soon can we be ready for warp speed?
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

SCOTT: Full power now, sir.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: If you will, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Aye sir, warp speed!
KIRK: Mister Sulu, you have the con. I'm gonna take our guest down and have a look at her whales. Oh, Mister Spock! Have you accounted for the variable mass of whales and water in your time re-entry programme?
SPOCK: Mister Scott cannot give me exact figures, Admiral. ...So I will make a guess.
KIRK: A guess? You, Spock? That's extraordinary!
SPOCK: I don't think he understands.
McCOY: No, Spock. He means that he feels safer about your 'guesses' than most other people's facts.
SPOCK: Then you're saying ...it is a compliment.
McCOY: It is.
SPOCK: Ah, then I will try to make the best guess I can.
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

KIRK: They say 'The sea is cold but the sea contains the hottest blood of all'
GILLIAN: 'Whales Weep Not', D.H. Lawrence.
KIRK: It's ironic. When man was killing these creatures, he was destroying his own future.
SCOTT: The beasties seem happy to see you, Doctor. I hope you like our little aquarium.
GILLIAN: A miracle, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: A miracle? That's yet to come.
GILLIAN: What does that mean?
KIRK: It means that our chances of getting home are not too good. You might have lived a longer life if you'd stayed where you belong.
GILLIAN: I belong here. I am a whale biologist. Suppose by some miracle you do get them through. ...Who in the twenty-third century knows anything about humpback whales?
KIRK: You have a point.
GILLIAN: What was that?
SCOTT: Admiral! I think you'd better get up there. We're having a power fall-off.
KIRK: Stay with them. I'm on my way.
SCOTT: Hold on tight, lassie. It gets bumpy from here.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

SCOTT (OC): Warp seven point five, ...Seven point nine,...
CHEKOV: Shields at Maximum!
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

SCOTT: Mister Sulu, that's all I can give you!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Can we make breakaway speed?
SPOCK: Hardly, Admiral, I cannot even guarantee we will escape the sun's gravity! I shall attempt to compensate by altering our trajectory.
SULU: Warp eight. Eight point one... Maximum speed, sir!
SPOCK: Admiral, I need thruster control.
KIRK: Acceleration thrusters at Spock's command!
SPOCK: Steady. ...Steady. ...Now!
(the Bird-of-Prey slingshots around the sun)
KIRK: Did braking thrusters fire?
SPOCK: They did, Admiral.
KIRK: Then where the hell are we? ...The Probe! ...Condition report, Spock.
SPOCK: No data, Admiral. Computers are non-functional.
CHEKOV: The mains are down, sir! Aux. power is not responding.
KIRK: Switch to manual control, Mister Sulu.
SULU: I have no control, sir!
McCOY: My God, Jim, where are we?
KIRK: Out of control, and blind as a bat!
[Starfleet Command]

CARTWRIGHT: Get him back! Get him back!
(the large window collapses)
SAREK: Look!
CARTWRIGHT: They're heading for the bridge!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Ground cushion! Keep the nose up if you can.
KIRK: We're in the water! Blow the hatch! ...You got us to the right place, Spock. Now all we have to do is get the whales out before we sink. Abandon ship! ...Scotty, do you hear me? ...Scotty? Move, move! See to the safety of all hands.
SPOCK (OC): I will.
[Bird-of-Prey cargo bay]

SCOTT: Lassie, get my arm!
GILLIAN: I've got it.
KIRK (OC): Scotty?
(outside the cargo bay doors)
SCOTT (OC): Admiral, help!
KIRK: I'm here, Scotty. I'm here!
(Kirk gets the cargo bay doors open releasing Gillian and Scotty)
KIRK: You're gonna be all right.
GILLIAN: The whales are trapped. What's wrong?
SCOTT: There's no power to the bay doors.
KIRK: Explosive override?
SCOTT: It's under water and there's no way to reach it.
KIRK: You go on ahead. Close the hatch!
SCOTT: Admiral, you'll be trapped!
KIRK: Go on!
(Kirk swims underwater and operates the manual release for the external cargo bay doors releasing the whales)
[Bird-of-Prey exterior floating in the bay]

UHURA: Do you see them?
GILLIAN: Oohh...
KIRK: There! ... Why don't they answer? Why don't they sing?
(the whales sing, the Probe retracts its antenna and moves off. The rain stops and the clouds recede)
[Starfleet Command]

CARTWRIGHT: Mister President, ...we have power!
[Bird-of-Prey exterior floating in the bay]

(in the bay the whales, the crew and Gillian frolic!)
[Federation council chamber]

FEDERATION PRESIDENT: The Council is now in session. If you will all take your seats. Bring in the accused. ...Captain Spock, you do not stand accused.
SPOCK: Mister President, I stand with my shipmates.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: As you wish. ...The charges and specifications are. Conspiracy. Assault on Federation Officers. Theft of Federation Property, namely the Starship Enterprise. Sabotage of the U.S.S. Excelsior, Wilful destruction of Federation Property, specifically the aforementioned U.S.S. Enterprise. And finally, disobeying direct orders of the Starfleet Commander. ...Admiral Kirk, how do you plead?
KIRK: On behalf of all of us, Mister President, I am authorised to plead guilty.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: So entered. Because of certain mitigating circumstances, all charges but one are summarily dismissed. ...The remaining charge, disobeying orders of a superior officer is directed solely at Admiral Kirk. I'm sure the Admiral will recognise the necessity of keeping discipline in any chain of command.
KIRK: I do, sir.
FEDERATION PRESIDENT: James T. Kirk. ...It is the judgment of this Council that you be reduced in rank to Captain, ...and that as a consequence of your new rank, you be given the duties for which you have repeatedly demonstrated unswerving ability. The command of a starship. ...Silence! Captain Kirk, You and your crew have saved this planet from its own short-sightedness ...and we are forever in your debt.
(prolonged applause and cheers from all those present)
GILLIAN: I'm so happy for you, I can't tell you! Thank you, so much.
KIRK: Wait a minute! Where you going?
GILLIAN: You're going to your ship. I'm going to mine. Science vessel. I've got three hundred years of catch-up learning to do.
KIRK: You mean this is ...goodbye?
GILLIAN: Why does it have to be goodbye?
KIRK: Well, like they say in your century, ...I don't even have your telephone number. ...How will I find you?
GILLIAN: Don't worry. ...I'll find you. (a kiss) See you around the galaxy.
SPOCK: Father?
SAREK: I am returning to Vulcan within the hour. I would like to take my leave of you.
SPOCK: It was most kind of you to make this effort.
SAREK: It was not an effort. You are my son. ...Besides, I am most impressed with your performance in this ...crisis.
SPOCK: Most kind.
SAREK: As I recall, I opposed your enlistment in Starfleet. ...It is possible that judgment was incorrect. ...Your associates are people of good character.
SPOCK: They are my friends.
SAREK: Yes, of course. ...Do you have a message for your mother?
SPOCK: Yes. Tell her ...I feel fine. Live long and prosper, father.
SAREK: Live long and prosper, my son.
[Shuttlecraft]

McCOY: The bureaucratic mentality is the only constant in the universe. We'll get a freighter.
SULU: With all respect, Doctor, I'm counting on Excelsior.
SCOTT: Excelsior? Why in God's name would you want that bucket of bolts?
KIRK: A ship is a ship.
SCOTT: Whatever you say, sir. Thy will be done.
KIRK: My friends, ...we've come home.
(they approach a shiny new Constitution-class starship, NCC-1701A, a New Enterprise)
[Enterprise-A bridge]

SULU: Helm ready, Captain.
KIRK: All right, Mister Sulu, Let's see what she's got.
SULU: Aye sir!

(scenes from the end of "Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan.")
[Enterprise engineering]

SPOCK: Don't grieve, Admiral, ...it is logical. The needs of the many ...outweigh...
KIRK: ...the needs of the few.
SPOCK: Or the one. I have been ...and always shall be ...your friend. ...Live long ...and prosper.
[Torpedo bay]

KIRK (OC): We are assembled here today to pay final respects to our honoured dead. This death takes place in the shadow of new life, the sunrise of a new world, a world that our beloved comrade gave his life to protect and nourish. He did not feel that sacrifice a vain or empty one. Of my friend, I can only say this. Of all the souls I have encountered in my travels, ...his was the most ...human.
SULU (OC): Honours, ...hup!
(the torpedo coffin is fired and lays in a clearing in the new, verdant forest on the Genesis Planet)
Spock's Voice: Space, the final frontier. ...These are the continuing voyages of the Starship Enterprise. ...Her ongoing mission, to explore strange new worlds. ...To seek out new lifeforms and new civilisations. ...To boldly go where no man has gone before.
OPENING CREDITS
[Enterprise bridge]

U.S.S. Enterprise. Captain's personal log. With most of our battle damage repaired, we're almost home. Yet I feel uneasy and I wonder why. Perhaps it's the emptiness of this vessel. Most of our trainee crew has been reassigned. Lieutenant Saavik and my son, David are exploring the Genesis planet which he helped create. And Enterprise feels like a house with all the children gone. No, more empty than even that. The death of Spock is like an open wound. It seems that I have left the noblest part of myself back there ...on that newborn planet.
KIRK: Status, Mister Sulu?
SULU: On course, Admiral. Estimating Spacedock in two point one hours.
KIRK: Very well, ...Mister Chekov, I'll need pre-approach scan. ...Take the science station, please.
CHEKOV: Yes sir.
KIRK: Uhura, any response from Starfleet on our Project Genesis inquiries?
UHURA: No sir, there is no response.
KIRK: That's very odd. ...Scotty, progress report?
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: I'm almost done, sir. You'll be fully automated by the time we dock.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Your timing is excellent, Mister Scott. You've fixed the barn door after the horse has come home. How much refit time till we can take her out of here?
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Eight weeks, sir. But you don't have eight weeks so I'll do it for ya in two.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Mister Scott. Have you always multiplied your repair estimates by a factor of four?
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Certainly, sir. How else can I keep my reputation as a miracle worker?
KIRK (on intercom): Your reputation is secure, Scotty.

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, take the con. I'll be in my quarters.
SULU: Aye sir.
TRAINEE FOSTER: Sir, ...I was wondering. ...Are they planning a ceremony when we get in? ...I mean, a reception?
KIRK: A hero's welcome, son? Is that what you'd like? ...Well, God knows, there should be. This time we paid for the party with our dearest blood.
[Merchantman bridge]

CAPTAIN: Steady, ...steady boys. Keep scanning... I thought you people were reliable. ...Where the hell is he!
VALKRIS: He has been here for some time. Put me on the hailing frequency. Commander Kruge, this is Valkris. (in Klingonese) I have obtained the Federation data. Ready to transmit.
KRUGE (OC): Well done, Valkris, ...well done.
CAPTAIN: What the hell is...?
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Disengage cloaking device!
(the Bird-of-Prey decloaks)
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Lights up!
(Kruge has a fearsome pet at his feet)
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Transmit data. ...Now!
[Merchantman bridge]

VALKRIS: (in Klingonese) Transmission completed. ...You will find it useful.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Then you have seen i?
[Merchantman bridge]

VALKRIS: (in Klingonese) I have, my lord.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Unfortunate.
[Merchantman bridge]

VALKRIS: (in Klingonese) Understood.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Thrusters!
[Merchantman bridge]

CAPTAIN: What's the hell's going on? When do I get paid off?
VALKRIS: Soon, Captain, quite soon. (in Klingonese) Success, my lord ...and my love.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) You will be remembered with honour. ...Fire.
(the Merchantman is destroyed)
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) New course. Federation Neutral Zone. (about the pet) ...Feed him!
MALTZ: (in Klingonese) Yes, my lord!
(the Enterprise approaches Spacedock)

[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Approach control, ...this is Enterprise. Ready for docking maneuver.
SPACEDOCK CONTROLLER (on intercom): Enterprise is cleared to dock.
KIRK: Lock on!
SULU: Systems locked.
KIRK: Spacedock, you have control.
SPACEDOCK CONTROLLER (on intercom): Affirmative, Enterprise. Enjoy the ride, and welcome home.
KIRK: Enterprise confirms.
[Spacedock control room]

VOICE (OC): Acknowledge, door closed.
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Would you look at that?
(U.S.S. Excelsior on viewscreen)
KIRK: My friends, the great experiment. The Excelsior, ready for trial runs.
SULU: She's supposed to have transwarp drive.
SCOTT: Aye. And if my grandmother had wheels, she'd be a wagon.
KIRK: Tut tut, Mister Scott. Young minds. Fresh ideas. ...Be tolerant.
(Commander Rand watches nostalgically from the Spacedock cafeteria)
COMPUTER VOICE: Enterprise, stand by for final docking procedure.
KIRK: Stand by umbilical and gravitational support systems.
SULU: Aye sir, moorings activated. ...All systems standing by.
CHEKOV: Admiral, ...this is not possible.
KIRK: Mister Chekov?
CHEKOV: An energy reading from 'C' deck ...from inside Mister Spock's quarters.
KIRK: I ordered Spock's quarters sealed!
CHEKOV: Yes sir, I sealed the room myself. Nevertheless I am reading a lifeform there.
KIRK: This entire crew seems on the edge of obsessive behaviour concerning Mister Spock.
UHURA: Sir! Security reports the door to Spock's quarters has been forced.
KIRK: I'm on my way. Sulu, continue docking procedure.
SULU (OC): Aye sir.
(Chekov says something in Russian to Scott about the security alert)
[Spock's quarters]

McCOY: (in Spock's voice) Jim, ...Help me. ...You left me on Genesis. ...Why did you do that? ...Help me.
KIRK: Bones, ...what the hell are you doing? Have you lost your mind!
McCOY: Help me, Jim. ...Take me home.
KIRK: Bones, we are. We are home.
McCOY: Then perhaps it's not too late. ...Climb the steps, Jim. ...Climb the steps of Mount Seleya.
KIRK: Mount Seleya? Bones, Mount Seleya is on Vulcan! We're home, ...on Earth!
McCOY: (in Spock's voice) Remember!
UHURA (on intercom): Admiral, docking is completed. Starfleet Commander Morrow is on his way for inspection.
KIRK: Uhura! Get the medics down here! Get them now!
[Enterprise torpedo bay]

MORROW: You've all done remarkable service under the most difficult conditions. You'll be receiving Starfleet's highest commendation, and more importantly, extended shore leave. ...That is, all but you, Mister Scott. They need your wisdom on the new Excelsior. ...Report there tomorrow as Captain of Engineering.
SCOTT: With all appreciation, sir, I'd prefer to supervise the refit of Enterprise.
MORROW: I'm afraid that won't be necessary.
SCOTT: But, sir...
MORROW: I'm sorry, Mister Scott, but there will be no refit.
KIRK: Admiral, I don't understand. The Enterprise is not...
MORROW: Jim, the Enterprise is twenty years old. We feel her day is over.
KIRK: But we had requested... We'd hoped to take her back to Genesis.
MORROW: That is out of the question.
KIRK: May I ask why?
MORROW: In your absence, Genesis has become a galactic controversy. ...Until the Federation Council makes policy, you are all under orders not to discuss with anyone your knowledge of Genesis. Consider it a quarantined planet, and a forbidden subject.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK (on viewscreen): To fully understand the events on which I report, it is necessary to review the theoretical data on the Genesis device as developed by Doctors Carol and David Marcus. Genesis, simply put, is life from lifelessness. It was the intention to introduce the Genesis Device into a preselected area of a lifeless space body, a moon or other dead form. The device when delivered would instantaneously cause the Genesis effect. Instead of a dead moon, a living, breathing planet now exists, capable of sustaining whatever lifeforms we see fit to deposit on it.
KRUGE: So? Speak!
TORG: Great power ...to control, ...dominate.
KRUGE: Speak.
MATLZ: Impressive. ...They can make planets.
KRUGE: Oh yes, ...new cities, homes in the country, ...your woman at your side, children playing at your feet. And overhead, fluttering in the breeze, the flag of the Federation. Charming. ...Station!
MALTZ: Yes, my lord!
KRUGE: Share this with no one.
TORG: Understood, my lord.
KRUGE: We are going to this planet. Even as our emissaries negotiate for peace with the Federation, we will act for the preservation of our race! We will seize the secret of this weapon. The secret of ultimate power!
TORG: Success, my lord.
THE GENESIS PLANET
STARDATE: 8210.3

[Grissom bridge]

SAAVIK (OC): We have reached destination planet at point zero three five.
ESTEBAN: Very well, Lieutenant. Helm. ...Execute standard orbital approach.
HELMSMAN: Standard orbit. Aye sir.
ESTEBAN: Communications! Send a coded message for Starfleet Commander, priority one. ...'Federation Science Vessel Grissom arriving Genesis Planet, Mutara Sector to begin research. J.T. Esteban, commanding.'
COMM OFFICER: Aye sir, coding now.
ESTEBAN: Doctor Marcus, it's your planet.
DAVID: Begin scanning, please. ...This is where the fun begins, Saavik!
SAAVIK: Just like your father, so human. ...All units functional, recorders are on. Scanning sector one. The foliage in fully developed state of growth. Temperature, twenty-two point two Celsius.
DAVID: Sector two. Indicating desert terrain. Minimal vegetation, temperature thirty-nine point four.
SAAVIK: Sector three. Sub-tropical vegetation. ...Temperature decreasing rapidly.
DAVID: It's snow. Snow in the same sector. Fantastic!
SAAVIK: Fascinating.
DAVID: All the varieties of land and weather known to Earth within a few hours walk!
(console bleeps)
SAAVIK: Metallic mass.
DAVID: Close-range scan. ...A photon tube! ...Gravitational fields were in flux. ...It must have soft-landed!
ESTEBAN: In code to Starfleet. 'Captain's Spock's tube located on Genesis surface.'
COMM OFFICER: Yes sir, ...coding your message.
DAVID: I don't believe it.
ESTEBAN: What is it?
SAAVIK: If equipment is functioning properly, indications are ...an animal lifeform.
ESTEBAN: You said there wouldn't be any...
DAVID: There shouldn't be any.
SAAVIK: Cross referenced and verified. An unidentifiable lifeform reading.
COMM OFFICER: Do you wish to advise Starfleet, sir?
ESTEBAN: Wait a minute! ...We don't know what we're talking about here.
DAVID: Why don't we beam it up?
ESTEBAN: Oh no you don't! Regulations specifically state, 'nothing shall be beamed aboard until danger of contamination has been eliminated.'
SAAVIK: Captain, ...the logical alternative is obvious. ...Beaming down to the surface is permitted.
ESTEBAN: Yes, if the Captain decides that the mission is vital and reasonably free of danger.
DAVID: Captain, please, ...we'll take the risk, but we've got to find out what it is.
SAAVIK: Or who.
[Kirk's apartment]

KIRK: Absent friends.
SULU: Admiral, what's going to happen to the Enterprise?
KIRK: She's to be decommissioned.
CHEKOV: Will we get another ship?
KIRK: I can't get an answer. Starfleet is up to its brass in galactic conference. No one has time for those who only stand and wait.
UHURA: Sir? About Doctor McCoy, how is he?
KIRK: He's home, resting comfortably, pumped full of tranquillisers. They say it's exhaustion. He promised me he'd stay put. Well we'll see.
(door chimes)
KIRK: Ah, Mister Scott. ...Come. ...Sarek! ...Ambassador, I had no idea you were here... I believe you know my crew.
SAREK: I will speak with you alone, Kirk.
KIRK: Please excuse us. ...Ambassador, I would have come to Vulcan to express my deepest sympathy.
SAREK: Spare me your human platitudes, Kirk. I have been to your Government. I have seen the Genesis information, and your own report.
KIRK: Then you know how bravely your son met his death.
SAREK: Why did you leave him on Genesis! Spock trusted you. You denied him his future!
KIRK: I saw no future.
SAREK: Only his body was in death, Kirk. And you were the last one to be with him.
KIRK: Yes, I was.
SAREK: Then you must know that you should have come with him to Vulcan.
KIRK: But ...why?
SAREK: Because he asked you to! He entrusted you with his very essence, with everything that was not of the body. He asked you to bring him to us ...and bring that which he gave you, his katra, his living spirit.
KIRK: Sir, ...your son meant more to me than you can know. I'd have given my life if it would have saved his. Believe me when I tell you ...he made no request of me!
SAREK: He would not have spoken of it openly.
KIRK: Then, how was...
SAREK: Kirk, I must have your thoughts. May I join your mind? ...He spoke of your friendship.
KIRK: Yes.
SAREK: He asked you not to grieve.
KIRK: Yes.
SAREK: The needs of the many ...outweigh...
KIRK: ...the needs of the few...
SAREK: ...or the one.
KIRK: Spock...
SAREK: I have been ...and always shall be ...your friend. Live long ...and prosper!
KIRK: No!
SAREK: Forgive me. It is not here. I had assumed he mind-melded with you. It is the Vulcan way ...when the body's end is near.
KIRK: We were separated! He couldn't touch me.
SAREK: I see. ...Then everything that he was. ...Everything that he knew ...is lost.
KIRK: Please wait! ...He would have found a way! If there was that much at stake, ...Spock would have found a way!
SAREK: Yes. ...But how?
KIRK: What if he joined with someone else?
[Electronic center]

COMPUTER VOICE: Engine Room, Flight Recorder Visual. Stardate 8128.7 eight.
KIRK: Go.
(recording from Reactor room in Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)
SPOCK (on monitor): Ship. ...Out of danger?
KIRK (on monitor): Yes.
KIRK: Back. Point seven seven.
COMPUTER VOICE: Flight recorder visual. Twenty-eight point seven seven.
KIRK (OC): Go.
McCOY (on monitor): No! You'll flood the whole compartment!
KIRK (on monitor): He'll die!
SCOTT (on monitor): Sir! He's dead already.
KIRK: Back. Point seven six.
COMPUTER VOICE: Flight recorder visual. Twenty-eight point seven six.
KIRK (OC): Go.
McCOY (on monitor): You're not going in there!
SPOCK (on monitor): Perhaps you're right. What is Mister Scott's condition?
McCOY (on monitor): Well, I don't think that he...
(Spock administers a Vulcan nerve pinch on McCoy)
SPOCK (on monitor): I'm sorry, Doctor. I have no time to discuss this logically.
KIRK: Freeze! ...Repeat ...and augment!
SPOCK (on monitor): Remember!
KIRK: McCoy!
SAREK: One alive, one not. Yet both in pain.
KIRK: What must I do?
SAREK: You must bring them to Mount Seleya, ...on Vulcan. Only there can both find peace.
KIRK: What you ask ...is difficult.
SAREK: You will find a way, Kirk. ...If you honour them both, you must.
KIRK: I will. I swear.
[Grissom orbiting the Genesis planet]

ESTEBAN (OC): Transporter room, stand by to energise.
HELM (OC): Aye sir. Energising now.
[Genesis planet surface - sub-tropical]

ESTEBAN (on intercom): Grissom to Saavik. We're picking up radiation from the lifeform.
SAAVIK: Affirmative, Captain. Our readings are well below danger level.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: Very well. Exercise caution, Lieutenant. This landing is Captain's discretion and I'm the one who's out on a limb.
[Genesis planet surface - sub-tropical

SAAVIK: I'll try to remember that.
(Spock's torpedo coffin has worm-like forms writhing over it)
DAVID: There are your lifeforms. These were microbes on the tube's surface. We shot them here from Enterprise. ...They were fruitful, and multiplied.
SAAVIK: But how could they have evolved so quickly?
DAVID: Saavik. ...What is it?
SAAVIK: Spock's burial robe.
(there is an earth tremor and a piercing cry)
[Starfleet officer's lounge]

MORROW: No. Absolutely not, Jim, ...You are my best officer. But I am Commander, Starfleet, so I don't break rules!
KIRK: Don't quote rules to me. I'm talking about loyalty and sacrifice. One man who's died for us, another who has deep emotional problems.
MORROW: Now! Wait a minute! This business about Spock and McCoy. ...Honestly, I never understood Vulcan mysticism.
KIRK: You don't have to believe! I'm not even sure I believe. But even if there's a chance that Spock has an eternal soul ...then it's my responsibility.
MORROW: Yours?
KIRK: As surely as if it were my very own! Give me back the Enterprise! With Scotty's help I could...
MORROW: No, Jim! The Enterprise would never stand the pounding and you know it.
KIRK: Then I'll find a ship. I'll hire a ship.
MORROW: Out of the question, my friend! The Council has ordered that no one but the science team goes to Genesis! Jim, your life and your career stand for rationality, not intellectual chaos. Keep up this emotional behaviour and you'll lose everything. You'll destroy yourself! Do you understand me, Jim?
KIRK: I hear you. ...I had to try.
MORROW: Of course.
KIRK: Thanks for the drink.
MORROW: Any time.
(as Kirk leaves he is joined by Sulu and Chekov)
SULU: The word, sir?
KIRK: The word ...is no. I am therefore going anyway.
SULU: You can count on our help, sir.
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Sulu. I'll need it.
CHEKOV: Shall I alert Doctor McCoy?
KIRK: Please. He has a long journey ahead of him.
[A cosmopolitan bar]

WAITRESS: Long time, Doc.
McCOY: Yeah. ...Anybody been looking for me?
WAITRESS: I have, ...but what's the use? What'll it be?
McCOY: Altair water.
WAITRESS: That's not your usual poison.
McCOY: To expect one to order poison in a bar is not logical.
WAITRESS: Got it.
ALIEN: To your planet, welcome.
McCOY: I think that's my line, stranger.
ALIEN: Oh, forgive. I here am new. But you are known, being McCoy from Enterprise.
McCOY: You have me at a disadvantage, sir.
ALIEN: I name not important. You seek I. Message received. Available ship stands by.
McCOY: How much and how soon?
ALIEN: How soon is now. How much is where?
McCOY: Somewhere in the Mutara Sector.
ALIEN: Oh. Mutara restricted. Take permits many. Money, more.
McCOY: There aren't going to be any damn permits! How can you get a permit to do a damn illegal thing? Look, price you name, money I got.
ALIEN: Place you name, money I name. Otherwise, bargain, no.
McCOY: All right, dammit. It's Genesis. The name of the place we're going is Genesis.
ALIEN: Genesis!
McCOY: Yes, Genesis! How can you be deaf with ears like that?
ALIEN: Genesis allowed is not. ...It's planet forbidden.
McCOY: Look, my backwards friend! Genesis may be 'planet forbidden' but I'm damn well...
CIVILIAN AGENT: Sir, ...I'm sorry, but your voice is carrying. I don't think you want to be discussing this subject in public.
McCOY: I'll discuss what I like, and who the hell are you?
CIVILIAN AGENT: Could I offer you a ride home, Doctor McCoy?
McCOY: Where's the logic in offering me a ride home, you idiot! If I wanted a ride home, would I be trying to charter a space flight?
ALIEN: Aarrgh!
McCOY: How the hell do you know who I am?
CIVILIAN AGENT: Federation Security, sir.
(McCoy tries the Vulcan nerve pinch on the agent unsuccessfully)
CIVILIAN AGENT: You're going to get a nice, long rest, Doctor.
[Genesis Planet arctic]

SAAVIK: Saavik to Grissom. We are definitely reading a second lifeform.
ESTEBAN (OC): We concur. Proceed with caution, Saavik.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: What the hell is going on down there?
[Prison cell]

GUARD #1: Make it quick, Admiral. They're moving him to the Federation funny farm.
KIRK: Yes, poor friend. I hear he's fruity as a nut cake.
GUARD #1: Two minutes.
McCOY: Jim.
KIRK: How many fingers do I have up?
(Kirk makes a Vulcan salute)
McCOY: That's not very damn funny.
KIRK: Your sense of humour's returned.
McCOY: The hell it has. What's that?
KIRK: Lexorin.
McCOY: Lexorin? What for?
KIRK: You're suffering from a Vulcan mind meld, Doctor.
McCOY: That green-blooded son of a bitch! It's his revenge for all the arguments he lost.
KIRK: Let me see your hand. This will make you well enough to travel.
[Prison outer office]

SULU: Where's Admiral Kirk?
GUARD #1: With the prisoner.
SULU: Get him quickly. Commander, Starfleet wants him right away.
GUARD #2: Uuhh! (yawns)
SULU: Keeping you busy?
GUARD #2: Don't get smart, Tiny.
[Prison cell]

GUARD #1: Admiral, ...Starfleet is....
KIRK: This man is sick! Take a look!
(Kirk punches the first guard and immobilises him)
SULU: The side elevator. Agents on their way up.
(Sulu throws the second guard and destroys the communications console)
SULU: Don't call me Tiny.
[Enterprise turbolift]

KIRK: Unit two, this is unit one. The Kobayashi Maru has set sail for the promised land. Acknowledge.
CHEKOV (OC): Message acknowledged. All units will be informed.
McCOY: You're taking me to the promised land?
KIRK: What are friends for?
(U.S.S. Excelsior in Spacedock)

[Excelsior corridor]

STYLES: Ah, Mister Scott. Calling it a night?
SCOTT: Yes sir.
STYLES: Turning in myself. Looking forward to breaking some of Enterprise's speed records tomorrow.
SCOTT: Ah, ah. Yes sir. Good night.
TURBOLIFT VOICE: Level please!
SCOTT: Transporter room.
TURBOLIFT VOICE: Thank you.
SCOTT: Up your shaft.
[Old City transporter station]

UHURA: Roger. Old City Station at twenty-two hundred hours. All is well.
STARFLEET VOICE: Understood. All stations clear.
MR. ADVENTURE: You amaze me, Commander.
UHURA: Oh, how is that?
MR. ADVENTURE: A twenty-year space veteran, yet you sure choose the worst duty station in town. I mean, look at this place, this is the hind end of space.
UHURA: Peace and quiet appeals to me, Lieutenant.
MR. ADVENTURE: Well, maybe that's okay for someone like you whose career is winding down. But me, I need some challenge in my life, some adventure, ...maybe even just a surprise or two.
UHURA: You know what they say, Be careful what you wish for. You may get it.
KIRK: Good evening, Commander. Is everything ready?
UHURA: Step into my parlour, gentlemen.
MR. ADVENTURE: That's Admiral Kirk, my God!
UHURA: Very good for you, Lieutenant.
MR. ADVENTURE: But it's damn irregular. No destination orders, no encoded ID's.
UHURA: All true.
MR. ADVENTURE: Well, ...what are we going to do about it?
UHURA: I am not going to do anything about it, but you're going to sit in the closet.
MR. ADVENTURE: The closet? Have you lost all your sense of reality?
UHURA: This isn't reality. ...This is fantasy. You wanted adventure? How's this? The old adrenalin going? Good boy. Now get in the closet.
MR. ADVENTURE: Okay! Uh...
UHURA: Go on! Go on!
MR. ADVENTURE: I'll just get in the closet. Okay!
McCOY: I'm glad you're on our side.
KIRK: Can you handle that?
UHURA: Oh, I'll have 'Mister Adventure' eating out of my hand, sir. And I'll see all of you at the rendezvous. Oh, and Admiral, ...all my hopes.
[Enterprise bridge]

SCOTT: As promised, she's all yours, sir. All systems automated and ready. A chimpanzee and two trainees could run her.
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Scott. I'll try not to take that personally. ...My friends, ...I can't ask you to go any further. Doctor McCoy and I have to do this. The rest of you do not.
CHEKOV: Admiral, we're losing precious time.
SULU: What course please, Admiral?
KIRK: Mister Scott?
SCOTT: I'd be grateful, Admiral, if you'd give the word.
KIRK: Gentlemen, ...may the wind be at our backs. Stations please!
KIRK: Engage auto systems.
SCOTT: Aye, engaged.
KIRK: Clear all moorings.
SULU: Cleared, sir.
KIRK: One-quarter impulse power.
SULU: One-quarter impulse.
CHEKOV: Sir. Commander, Starfleet on emergency channel. He orders you to surrender this vessel.
KIRK: No reply, Chekov.
CHEKOV (OC): Aye sir.
KIRK: Steady as she goes, Sulu.
[Style's quarters]

FIRST OFFICER (on intercom): Yellow Alert! Captain to the bridge. Yellow Alert!
STYLES: Bridge, this is the Captain. How can you have a Yellow Alert in Spacedock!
FIRST OFFICER (on intercom): Sir, someone is stealing the Enterprise!
STYLES: I'm on my way.
[Spacedock cafeteria]

STARFLEET VOICE: ...Alert! Yellow Alert! All stations, Yellow Alert! ...Yellow Alert! Yellow Alert! All stations, Yellow Alert!
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: One minute to space doors.
McCOY: Are you just gonna walk through them?
KIRK: Calm yourself, Doctor.
CHEKOV: Sir, Excelsior is powering up with orders to pursue.
[Excelsior bridge]

STARFLEET VOICE: Yellow Alert!
STYLES: Status!
FIRST OFFICER: All automates ready and functioning. Automatic moorings retracted. All speeds available through transwarp drive.
STYLES: Incredible machine. Helm, one-quarter impulse power.
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Thirty seconds to space doors.
COMPUTER VOICE: Warning! Secured space-doors. ...Warning! Secured space-doors.
KIRK: And now, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Sir?
KIRK: The doors, Mister Scott!
SCOTT: Aye sir. I'm workin' on it.
STARFLEET VOICE: Danger! Space-doors are closed. Danger!
(bleeping and the Space-doors open)
SULU: We have cleared space-doors.
KIRK: Full impulse power!
SULU: Aye.
[Excelsior bridge]

STYLES: Stand by, tractor beam!
FIRST OFFICER: Tractor beam, on.
STYLES: If he tries to get away with warp drive, Ha, he's really in for a shock.
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Excelsior closing to four thousand metres, sir.
KIRK: Scotty, we'll need everything you have.
SCOTT: Aye sir. Warp drive standing by!
[Excelsior bridge]

STYLES: Kirk! If you do this, you'll never sit in the Captain's chair again.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Warp speed.
SULU: Aye sir. ...Warp speed.
[Excelsior bridge]

STYLES: Prepare for warp speed! Standby transwarp drive!
FIRST OFFICER: Transwarp at your command, sir!
COMPUTER VOICE: Full power available.
STYLES: Execute!
(U.S.S. Excelsior slows down)
COMPUTER VOICE: ...power available. ...Full ...pow-er ...av--ail--a---ble.
(TRANSWARP FACTOR display disappears and message 'GOOD MORNING CAPTAIN' appears)
COMPUTER VOICE: Transwarp drive maximum velocity in five, four, three, two, one...
(U.S.S. Excelsior slows to a halt)
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Scotty, as good as your word.
SCOTT: Aye sir. The more they over-think the plumbing, the easier it is to stop up the drain. ...Here, Doctor, souvenirs from one surgeon to another. I took it out of her main transwarp computer drive.
McCOY: Nice of you to tell me in advance.
KIRK: That's what you get for missing the staff meeting, Doctor. Gentlemen, your work today has been outstanding. I intend to recommend you all for promotion, ...in whatever fleet we end up serving. Best speed to Genesis.
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

(Saavik and David find a young Vulcan)
SAAVIK: (in Vulcan) I am Saavik. ...Can you speak?
DAVID The Genesis Wave. His cells could have been regenerated.
SAAVIK: Captain, this is Saavik. Come in, please.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: Yes, Saavik, go ahead.
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

SAAVIK: We have found the life sign. It is a Vulcan child, perhaps eight to ten Earth years of age.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: A child! How did he get there?
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

SAAVIK: It is Doctor Marcus' opinion that this is... That the Genesis effect has in some way regenerated ...Captain Spock.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: Ah, ...Saavik, that's, ah, that's extraordinary. What would you like to do next?
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

SAAVIK: Request permission to beam aboard immediately.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: Saavik Does Doctor Marcus think there could be any chance of, ...ah, ...radioactive contamination?
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

DAVID: No.
SAAVIK: None that he can detect, sir.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: Well, all the same, I'm going to advise Starfleet and get instructions.
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

SAAVIK: I'm sure Starfleet would approve, sir.
ESTEBAN (on intercom): Probably true, but let's do it by the book.
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: Stand by on this channel. ...Go.
COMM OFFICER: Starfleet Command, this is the U.S.S. Grissom on sub-space coded channel ninety-eight point eight. Come in, please. ...Sir, something's jamming our transmission. An energy surge.
ESTEBAN: Locate.
COMM OFFICER: Sir, it's from astern, Captain.
(Kruge's Bird-of-Prey decloaks)
ESTEBAN: Oh, my God!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Gunner! Target engine only!
KLINGON GUNNER #1: (in Klingonese) Ready!
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

SAAVIK: Captain, what is happening?
[Grissom bridge]

ESTEBAN: We are under attack! Stand by for evasive...
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Fire!
(the Grissom is destroyed)
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) I wanted prisoners!
KLINGON GUNNER #1: (in Klingonese) A lucky shot, sir.
(Kruge vaporises the gunner)
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Animal!
TORG: Sir, may I suggest.
KRUGE: Say the wrong thing, Torg...
TORG: There are life signs on the planet. Perhaps the very scientists you seek.
SAAVIK: (on intercom) Saavik calling Grissom.
KRUGE: Very good.
[Genesis planet surface - arctic]

SAAVIK: Grissom! This is Saavik on emergency frequency. Come in please!
DAVID: Saavik. ...What happened to them?
SAAVIK: It would seem that Grissom was destroyed by an enemy attack. We must go. They will soon come after us.
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Estimating Genesis two point nine hours, present speed.
KIRK: Can we hold speed, Scotty?
SCOTT: Aye sir, she's got her second wind now.
KIRK: Scan for vessels in pursuit.
MCCOY (OC): (In Spock's voice) Scanning. ...Indications negative at this time.
McCOY: Did I get it right?
KIRK: Great, Bones, ...just great.
[Genesis planet - sub-tropical]

(Kruge using a scanner and two other crewmen)
[Genesis planet - arctic]

SAAVIK: It's time for total truth between us. This planet is not what you intended, or hoped for, is it?
DAVID: Not exactly.
SAAVIK: Why?
DAVID: I used protomatter in the Genesis matrix.
SAAVIK: Protomatter. An unstable substance which every ethical scientist in the galaxy has denounced as dangerously unpredictable.
DAVID: But it was the only way to solve certain problems.
SAAVIK: So, like your father, you changed the rules.
DAVID: If I hadn't, it might have been years, ...or never!
SAAVIK: How many have paid the price for your impatience? How many have died? How much damage have you done? ...And what is yet to come?
[Genesis planet - sub-tropical]

KLINGON VOICES (OC): (in Klingonese)
(the Klingons have discovered Spock's torpedo coffin. The worm-like forms have grown enormously. Kruge stops a disruptor being drawn and wrestles with and kills a serpent which has evolved)
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Bridge, ...nothing happening here. Am resuming search.
[Genesis planet - cavern]

DAVID: This planet is ageing in surges.
SAAVIK: And Spock with it. It seems they're joined together.
DAVID: They are.
SAAVIK: How long?
DAVID: Days, ...maybe hours. I'm sorry.
SAAVIK: It will be hardest on Spock. Soon he will feel the burning of his Vulcan blood.
DAVID: But, I don't understand.
SAAVIK: Pon farr. Vulcan males must endure it every seven years of their adult life.
(David's tricorder bleeps)
DAVID: Whoever they are, they're getting closer.
SAAVIK: I'll go.
DAVID: No! ...I'll do it. Give me your phaser.
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Sir, Starfleet calling U.S.S. Grissom. A warning about us.
KIRK: Response?
CHEKOV: Nothing. As before.
KIRK: What's the Grissom up to? ...Will she join us, or will she fire on us? ...Chekov, break radio silence. Send Captain Esteban my compliments.
CHEKOV: Aye sir.
KIRK: How are we doing?
McCOY: How are we doing? ...Funny you should put it quite that way, Jim. ...We are doing fine. But I'd feel safer giving him one of my kidneys than what's scrambled in my brain.
CHEKOV: Admiral, there is no response from Grissom on any channel.
KIRK: Keep trying, Chekov, at regular intervals.
[Genesis planet - cavern]

(the planet trembles and the young Spock cries out)
SAAVIK: (in Vulcan) So it has come.
SAAVIK: It is called Pon Farr. ...Pon farr.
YOUNG SPOCK: (in Vulcan) Pon farr.
SAAVIK: (in Vulcan) ...Will you trust me?
(their hands touch as she conducts the ritual)
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU (OC): We are secured from warp speed... Now entering Genesis Sector.
KIRK: Proceed at impulse power.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

MALTZ: Vessel entering sector.
TORG: Yes. ...Federation Battle Cruiser. Have they scanned us?
MALTZ: Not yet.
TORG: (in Klingonese) Engage cloaking device.
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV (OC): I'd swear something that was there sir.
KIRK (OC): What did you see?
CHEKOV: For an instant ...a scout class vessel.
KIRK: Could be Grissom. Patch in the hailing frequency. Grissom, this is Enterprise calling. Please come in.
[Genesis planet - cavern]

KIRK (on intercom): Grissom, this is Enterprise calling. Do you read?
SERGEANT: (in Klingonese) Get up!
SAAVIK: Spock!
SERGEANT: (in Klingonese) Get up!
(Saavik and the young Spock are dragged to their feet)
KRUGE: I've come a long way for the power of Genesis. And what do I find? A weakling human, ...a Vulcan boy, ...and a woman!
SAAVIK: My Lord, we are survivors of a doomed expedition. This planet will destroy itself in hours. The Genesis experiment is a failure.
KRUGE: A failure! The most powerful destructive force ever created! ...You will tell me the secret of the Genesis torpedo.
SAAVIK: I have no knowledge.
KRUGE: Then I hope pain is something you enjoy.
SERGEANT: (in Klingonese) My Lord!
KRUGE: I ordered no interruptions.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

TORG: But sir! Federation starship approaching.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Bring me up!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Grissom, this is Enterprise calling. Do you read?
[Genesis planet - cavern]

KIRK (on intercom): Grissom, this is Enterprise calling. Please come in.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Battle alert.
KIRK (on intercom) This is Enterprise. Admiral Kirk calling Captain Esteban or Lieutenant Saavik. Please come in!
KRUGE: Report status!
TORG: We are cloaked. Enemy closing on impulse power. Range, five thousand kellicams.
KRUGE: Good. ...This is the turn of luck I have been waiting for.
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Nothing on my scanners, sir.
KIRK: Short-range scan, Mister Chekov. Put it on visual, Mister Sulu.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

MALTZ (OC): Range, three thousand kellicams.
KRUGE: Steady. Continue on impulse power.
MALTZ: Range, two thousand kellicams.
KRUGE: Standby to transfer energy to weapons ...at my command!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: There. That distortion. See it?
SULU: Yes sir. It's getting larger as we close in.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

MALTZ (OC): Firing range, sir.
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Gunner! Target engine only. Understood?
KLINGON GUNNER #2: (in Klingonese) Understood clearly, sir.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Opinion, Mister Sulu?
SULU: I think it's an energy surge.
KIRK: Yes. Enough energy to hide a ship, wouldn't you say?
SULU: A cloaking device?
KIRK: RED ALERT, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

MALTZ: One thousand kellicams, closing!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: All power to the weapons systems.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Wait! ...Wait.
[Enterprise bridge]

McCOY: No shields?
KIRK: If my guess is right, they'll have to de-cloak before they can fire.
McCOY: May all your guesses be right.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

MALTZ: (in Klingonese) five hundred Kellicams!
KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Stand by torpedoes. ...De-cloak!
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Klingon Bird of Prey, sir! She's arming torpedoes!
KIRK: Fire, Mister Scott!
KIRK: Good shooting, Mister Scott. ...Precautionary, Mister Chekov. Shields up.
CHEKOV (OC): Aye sir.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Emergency power to the thrusters!
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Sir, the shields non-responsive.
KIRK: Scotty?
SCOTT: The automation system's overloaded. I didn't expect to take us into combat, ya know!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Fire!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Emergency power! Prepare to return fire. Mister Scott, can you transfer power to the phaser banks.
SCOTT: I don't think so, sir.
KIRK: What happened?
SCOTT: They've knocked out the automation center. I've got no control over anything!
KIRK: Mister Sulu?
SULU: Nothing sir.
KIRK: So ...we're a sitting duck.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

TORG: Ready to fire emergency tube.
KRUGE: Why haven't they finished us? ...They outgun me ten to one.
MALTZ: My Lord, enemy commander wishes a truce to confer.
KRUGE: Put him on screen!
KIRK (on viewscreen): This is Admiral James T. Kirk of the Federation Starship Enterprise.
KRUGE: So! The Genesis Commander himself.
KIRK (on viewscreen): By violation of treaty between the Federation and the Klingon Empire, your presence here is an act of war. You have two minutes to surrender your crew and your vessel, or we will destroy you.
KRUGE: He's hiding something. We may have dealt him a more serious blow than I thought.
TORG: How can you tell that?
KRUGE: I trust my instincts. ...Admiral Kirk, this is your opponent speaking.
[Enterprise bridge]

KRUGE (OC): Do not lecture me about treaty violations. The Federation, in creating an ultimate weapon, has become a gang of Intergalactic criminals.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: It is not I who will surrender, it is you! ...On the planet below, I have three prisoners from the team who developed your doomsday weapon. If you do not surrender immediately, I will execute them, one at a time, as enemies of galactic peace.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Who is this? How dare you take prisoners?
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Who I am is not important. That I have them is. ...I will allow you speak to them.
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

SAAVIK: Admiral, this is Lieutenant Saavik.
KIRK (on intercom): Saavik,...
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Is ...David with you?
SAAVIK (on intercom): Yes, he is. And someone else. A Vulcan scientist of your acquaintance.
KIRK: This ...Vulcan. ...Is he alive?
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

SAAVIK: He is not himself, but he lives.
[Enterprise bridge]

SAAVIK (on intercom): He is subject to rapid ageing, ...like this unstable planet.
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

DAVID: Hello, sir. It's David.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: I'm sorry I'm late.
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

DAVID: It's okay, ...I should have known you'd come. Saavik's right, this planet is unstable. It's going to destroy itself in a matter of hours.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: David! ...What went wrong?
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

DAVID: I went wrong.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: David, I don't understand.
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

DAVID: I'm sorry, sir. Just don't surrender. Genesis doesn't work! I can't believe they'd kill us for it.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Admiral, your young friend is mistaken. I meant what I said. And now, to show my intentions are sincere, I shall kill one of the prisoners.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Wait a minute! Give me a chance to talk...
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) Kill one of them. ...I don't care which.
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

(David fights with a Klingon who kills him)
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Saavik? ...David?
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

SAAVIK: Admiral, ...David is dead.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Klingon bastard! ...Klingon bastard! You've killed my son! ...You Klingon bastard!
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

KRUGE: There are two more prisoners, Admiral. Do you want them killed too? ...Surrender your vessel!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: All right. All right, damn you! ...All right! ...Give me a minute to inform my crew.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: I give two minutes for you, and your gallant crew. ...Take every last man. Form a boarding party, armed heavily!
TORG: They outnumber us, my Lord.
KRUGE: We are Klingons! Once you control the ship, we will transfer our flag there, And take Genesis from their own memory banks!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, what is the crew complement of a Bird-of-Prey?
SULU: About a dozen officers and men.
KIRK: With some on the planet, ...I swear to you, we're not finished yet.
KIRK: Bones, you and Sulu to the transporter room. The rest of you with me. We have a job to do. ...Commander, Klingon vessel. Prepare to board this ship on my next signal.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: No tricks, Kirk. You have one minute.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: No tricks. ...I'm looking forward to meeting you.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: (in Klingonese) To the transporter room. Success!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Computer. This is Admiral James T. Kirk requesting security access. Computer. Destruct Sequence One, code one, one-A.
SCOTT: Computer. Commander Montgomery Scott, Chief Engineering Officer. Destruct sequence two, code one one-A, two-B.
CHEKOV: Computer. This is Commander Pavel Chekov, acting science officer. Destruct sequence three, code one-B, two-B, three.
COMPUTER VOICE: Destruct sequence completed and engaged. Awaiting final code for one-minute countdown.
KIRK: Code zero, zero, zero, ...destruct zero.
COMPUTER VOICE: Destruct Sequence is activated.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Kirk, your time runs out.
[Enterprise transporter room]

KIRK: All set?
SULU (OC): Aye sir.
KIRK: Commander, Klingon vessel. We are energising transporter beam. ...Now!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Transporter stand by!
[Enterprise transporter room]

(the Klingons replace the Enterprise crew)
[Enterprise bridge]

TORG: My Lord. The ship appears to be deserted.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: How can that be? They're hiding!
[Enterprise bridge]

TORG: Yes sir. But the bridge appears to be run by computer. It is the only thing speaking.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Speaking? Let me hear.
[Enterprise bridge]

COMPUTER VOICE: Nine, ...eight, ...seven, ...six, ...five,...
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KRUGE: Get out! Get out of there! Get out!
COMPUTER VOICE: ...one...
(explosions rip through the Enterprise. Its crew on Genesis watch the fireball streak through the planet's atmosphere)
[Genesis planet - Kirk's landing]

KIRK: My god, Bones. What have I done?
McCOY: What you had to do. What you always do. Turn death into a fighting chance to live.
SULU: Planet core readings unstable. Changing rapidly.
KIRK: What about surface life signs?
SULU: There!
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

SAAVIK: No, don't touch him!
(the rapidly maturing Spock hurls one the Klingons away. Kirk and the crew arrive and Kirk vaporises the other Klingon)
KIRK: Bones.
(while they gather round Spock Kirk discovers David's body)
KIRK: What happened?
SAAVIK: He gave his life to save us.
McCOY: Rapid ageing, ...all genetic functions highly accelerated.
KIRK: What about his mind?
McCOY: His mind's a void. It seems, Admiral, that I've got all his marbles.
KIRK: Is there anything we can do?
SAAVIK: Only one thing, sir. Get him off this planet. His ageing is part of what's going on around us.
(Kirk discovers a Klingon communicator)
KIRK: Klingon Commander, this is Admiral James T. Kirk. ...I am alive and well on the planet's surface.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK (on intercom): I know this will come as a pleasant surprise for you.
[Genesis - Klingon camp]

KIRK: Our ship was the victim of an unfortunate accident. Sorry about your crew, but as we say on Earth, ...'c'est la vie', ...I have what you want. ...I have the secret of Genesis. ...You're gonna have to bring us up there to get it. ...Do you hear me! ...I'm waiting for you! What is your answer?
(Kruge appears in a transporter beam)
KRUGE: Drop all weapons! ...Over there, All but Kirk. ...Maltz. Prisoners are at beam coordinates.
KIRK: You should take the Vulcan, too.
KRUGE: No.
KIRK: But, why?
KRUGE: Because you wish it. (in Klingonese) ...Maltz! Activate beam!
(Sulu, Chekov, Saavik Scott and McCoy are beamed up)
KRUGE: Genesis, I want it.
KIRK: Beam the Vulcan up ...and we'll talk.
KRUGE: Give me what I want and I'll consider it.
KIRK: You fool, look around you! The planet's destroying itself!
KRUGE: Yes. Exhilarating, isn't it!
KIRK: If we don't help each other, we'll die here!
KRUGE: Perfect! Then that's the way it shall be!
(suddenly a huge rock erupts out of the ground and throws Kruge on to Kirk and they grapple)
KRUGE: Give me Genesis!
(Kirk breaks free, they fight, falling onto a lower promontory, part of which collapses with Kruge hanging onto to the edge)
KIRK: Give me your hand!
KRUGE: Kirk!
(Kirk then begins to kick the hanging Kruge)
KIRK: I ...have had ...enough of you!!
(Kirk kicks again and Kruge falls towards the red-hot lava below. He shoulders Spock's inert body and calls into the Klingon communicator.)
KIRK: (in Klingonese) Maltz! ...Activate beam!
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Don't!
(Kirk has his phaser pointed at Maltz)
KIRK: How many more?
SCOTT: Just him, sir!
KIRK: Bones, help Spock! We've got to break out of orbit. ...You! Help us or die!
MALTZ: I do not deserve to live!
KIRK: Fine, I'll kill you later! Let's get out of here!
SCOTT: Where's the damn anti-matter inducer?
CHEKOV: This? ...No, this!
SCOTT: That, or nothing!
SULU: If I read this right, sir, we have full power.
KIRK: Go, Sulu!
(the Bird-of-Prey leaves orbit)
KIRK: Goodbye, David.
SULU: We are clear and free to navigate.
KIRK: Best speed to Vulcan. Mister Chekov, take the prisoner below.
CHEKOV: Aye sir.
MALTZ: Wait! You said you would kill me!
KIRK: I lied.
[Bird-of-Prey sickbay]

McCOY: Spock. For God's sake talk to me! ...You struck this damn thing in my head, remember? Remember? Now tell me what to do with it. Help me. ...I'm gonna tell you something that ...I never thought I'd hear myself say. But it seems that I've missed you. I don't think I could stand to lose you again.
[Vulcan - temple area]

UHURA: Ambassador, They are on approach. They're requesting permission to land.
SAREK: Permission granted. Tell them, ...tell Kirk we'll be ready.
[Bird-of-Prey bridge]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, you're on manual.
SULU: It's been a while, sir. Here we go. ...Retrothrusters!
[Vulcan - temple area]

(the Bird-of-Prey settles on the landing pad and with Sarek watching the crew appear bearing a stretcher with Spock on it)
UHURA: Sarek is waiting above, sir.
[Vulcan temple]

PRIESTESS: (in Vulcan) Kal-tor kal-if-fah.
PRIESTESS: Sarek, ...child of Skon, ...child of Solkar, the body of your son breathes still. What is your wish?
SAREK: I ask for fal-tor-pan, the refusion.
PRIESTESS: What you seek has not been done since ages past, and then, only in legend. Your request is not logical.
SAREK: Forgive me, T'Lar. My logic is uncertain where my son is concerned.
PRIESTESS: Who is the Keeper of the katra?
McCOY: I am ...McCoy, ...Leonard H., ...Son of David.
PRIESTESS: McCoy, son of David, since thou art human, we cannot expect thee to understand fully what Sarek has requested. Spock's body lives. ...With your approval, we shall use all our powers to return to his body that which you possess. But McCoy, ...you must now be warned! The danger to thyself is as grave as the danger to Spock. ...You must make the choice.
McCOY: I choose the danger. ...Hell of time to ask.
(Spock and McCoy lie side by side with the Priestess between them)
PRIESTESS: (in Vulcan) Ben, wal, navu.
(the Priestess places her fingers on each forehead)
[Vulcan temple area - sunrise]

(a gong is sounded and the High Priestess, Sarek and McCoy emerge)
McCOY: I'm all right, Jim.
KIRK: What about Spock?
SAREK: Only time will answer. ...Kirk. I thank you. What you have done is...
KIRK: What I have done, ...I had to do.
SAREK: But at what cost? Your ship. Your son.
KIRK: If I hadn't tried, ...the cost would have been my soul.
(Spock in a long, white, hooded robe is escorted from the temple. He turns and looks at each of the crew, finally Kirk)
SPOCK: My father says you have been my friend. ...You came back for me.
KIRK: You would have done the same for me.
SPOCK: Why would you do this?
KIRK: Because the needs of the one ...outweigh the needs of the many.
SPOCK: I have been ...and ever shall be ...your friend.
KIRK: Yes! Yes, Spock.
SPOCK: The ship. ...Out of danger?
KIRK: You saved the ship, ...You saved us all. Don't you remember?
SPOCK: Jim, ...your name is Jim.
KIRK: Yes.
(as Spock turns, McCoy taps his head and the crew gather round)

...AND THE ADVENTURE CONTINUES...




IN THE 23RD CENTURY...

[Bridge simulator room]

Captain's log, stardate 8130.3. Starship Enterprise on training mission to Gamma Hydra, Section fourteen, coordinates twenty-two eighty-seven four. Approaching Neutral Zone, all systems normal and functioning.

SULU: Leaving Section Fourteen for Section Fifteen.
SAAVIK: Stand by. Project parabolic course to avoid entering Neutral Zone.
SULU: Aye, Captain. ...Course change projected.
UHURA: Captain, ...I'm getting something on the distress channel.
SAAVIK: On speakers!
KOBAYASHI MARU VOICE: Imperative! This is the Kobayashi Maru, ...nineteen periods out of Altair Six. We have struck a gravitic mine and have lost all power. ...Our hull is penetrated and we have sustained many casualties.
UHURA: This is the Starship Enterprise. Your message is breaking up. Can you give your coordinates? Repeat. This is the Starship...
KOBAYASHI MARU VOICE: Enterprise, our position is Gamma Hydra, Section Ten.
SAAVIK: In the Neutral Zone.
KOBAYASHI MARU VOICE: Hull penetrated, life support systems failing. Can you assist us, Enterprise? Can you assist us?
SAAVIK: Data on Kobayashi Maru!
COMPUTER VOICE: Subject vessel is third class neutronic fuel carrier, crew of eighty-one, three hundred passengers.
SAAVIK: Damn. Mister Sulu, plot an intercept course.
SULU: May I remind the Captain that if a starship enters the Zone.
SAAVIK: I'm aware of my responsibilities, Mister
SULU: Estimating two minutes to intercept. ...Now entering the Neutral Zone.
COMPUTER VOICE: Warning. We have entered the Neutral Zone. ...Warning.
SPOCK: We are now in violation of Treaty, Captain
SAAVIK: Stand by transporter room, ready to beam survivors aboard.
UHURA: Captain, I've lost their signal!
COMPUTER VOICE: Alert! Sensors indicate three Klingon Cruisers, bearing three one six, mark four, closing fast.
SAAVIK: Visual! ...Battle stations! Activate shields!
SULU: Shields activated!
SAAVIK: Inform the Klingons we are on a rescue mission.
UHURA: They're jamming all the frequencies, Captain.
COMPUTER VOICE: Klingons on attack course and closing.
SAAVIK: We're in over our heads. Mister Sulu, get us out of here.
SULU: I'll try, Captain.
COMPUTER VOICE: Alert! Klingon torpedoes activated.
SAAVIK: Evasive action!
(an explosion rocks the bridge)
SAAVIK: Engineering! Damage report!
SCOTT (OC): Main energiser hit, Captain!
SAAVIK: Engage auxiliary power. Prepare to return fire!
(another explosion rocks the bridge)
CADET: Shields collapsing, Captain!
SAAVIK: Fire all phasers!
SPOCK: No power to the weapons, Captain.
(yet another explosion rocks the bridge)
SCOTT (OC): Captain, it's no use. We're dead in space.
SAAVIK: Activate escape pods. Send out the Log Buoy. ...All hands abandon ship. Repeat, ...all hands abandon ship.
KIRK (OC): All right, open her up.
SAAVIK: Any suggestions, Admiral?
KIRK: Prayer, Mister Saavik. The Klingons don't take prisoners. Lights!
TANNOY VOICE: Motors on!
KIRK: Captain!
SPOCK: Trainees ...to the briefing room.
TANNOY VOICE: Maintenance Crew! Report to the bridge simulator.
KIRK: Physician, heal thyself.
McCOY: Is that's all you gotta to say? What about my performance?
KIRK: I'm not a drama critic. ...Well, Mister Saavik, are you going to stay with the sinking ship?
SAAVIK: Permission to speak candidly, sir?
KIRK: Granted.
SAAVIK: I don't believe this was a fair test of my command abilities.
KIRK: And why not?
SAAVIK: Because ...there was no way to win.
KIRK: A no-win situation is a possibility every commander may face. Has that never occurred to you?
SAAVIK: No sir. It has not.
KIRK: How we deal with death is at least as important as how we deal with life, wouldn't you say?
SAAVIK: As I indicated, Admiral, that thought had not occurred to me.
KIRK: Well, now you have something new to think about. Carry on.
McCOY: Admiral? Wouldn't it be easier to just put an experienced crew back on the ship?
KIRK: Galloping about the cosmos is a game for the young, Doctor.
UHURA: Now what is that supposed to mean?

[Corridor outside bridge simulator room]

KIRK: Aren't you dead? I assume you are loitering here to learn what efficiency rating I plan to give your cadets.
SPOCK: I am understandably curious.
KIRK: They destroyed the simulator room and you with it.
SPOCK: The Kobayashi Maru scenario frequently wreaks havoc with students and equipment. As I recall you took the test three times yourself. Your final solution was, shall we say, unique?
KIRK: It had the virtue of never having been tried. Oh, by the way, ...thank you for this.
SPOCK: I know of your fondness for antiques.
KIRK: 'It was the best of times, it was the worst of times' ...Message, Spock?
SPOCK: None of that I'm conscious of ...except, of course, happy birthday, ...surely the best of times.
TANNOY VOICE: Captain Spock, Captain Spock, space shuttle leaving in fifteen minutes.
KIRK: Where are you off to, now?
SPOCK: The Enterprise. I must check in before your inspection. And you?
KIRK: Home.

[Kirk's apartment]

KIRK: Why! Bless me, Doctor! What beams you into this neck of the woods?
McCOY: 'Beware Romulans bearing gifts.' Happy Birthday, Jim.
KIRK: Romulan Ale! Why, Bones, you know this is illegal.
McCOY: I only use it for medicinal purposes. I got aboard a ship that brings me in a case every now and then across the Neutral Zone. Now don't be a prig.
KIRK: Twenty-two, eighty-three.
McCOY: Yeah well it takes this stuff a while to ferment. Here now, gimme. ...Now you open this one.
KIRK: I'm almost afraid to. What is it? Klingon aphrodisiacs?
McCOY: No.
KIRK: Oh. ...Bones, this is ...charming.
McCOY: For most patients of your age, I generally administer Retnax Five.
KIRK: I'm allergic to Retnax Five.
McCOY: Exactly. Cheers!
KIRK: Cheers! ...Aahh!
McCOY: Happy Birthday!
KIRK: I don't know what to say.
McCOY: Well you could say thank you.
KIRK: Thank you.
McCOY: Damn it, Jim, what the hell's the matter with you? Other people have birthdays. Why are we treating yours like a funeral?
KIRK: Bones, I don't want to be lectured.
McCOY: What the hell do you want? ...This is not about age, ...and you know it. This is about you flying a goddamn computer console when you wanna be out there hopping Galaxies.
KIRK: Spare me your notions of poetry, please. We all have our assigned duties.
McCOY: Bull. You're hiding ...hiding behind rules and regulations.
KIRK: Who am I hiding from?
McCOY: From yourself, Admiral!
KIRK: Don't mince words, Bones, What do you really think?
McCOY: Jim, I'm your doctor and I'm your friend. Get back your command. Get it back before you turn into part of this collection. Before you really do grow old.

Starship log, stardate 8130.4. Log entry by First Officer Pavel Chekov. Starship Reliant on orbital approach to Ceti Alpha VI, in connection with Project Genesis. We are continuing our search for a lifeless planet to satisfy the requirements of a test site for the Genesis Experiment. So far no success.

[Reliant bridge]

TERRELL: Standard orbit please. Mister Beach. Any change in the surface scan?
BEACH: Negative. Limited atmosphere, dominated by craylon gas, sand and high velocity winds. It's incapable of supporting lifeforms.
CHEKOV: Does it have to be completely lifeless?
TERRELL: Don't tell me you've found something.
CHEKOV: We've picked up a minor energy flux reading on one dynoscanner.
TERRELL: Damn! Are you sure? Maybe the scanner's out of adjustment.
CHEKOV: I suppose it could be a particle of preanimate matter caught in the matrix.
TERRELL: All right, get on the Comm-pic to Doctor Marcus.
KYLE: Aye sir.
TERRELL: Maybe it's something we can transplant.
CHEKOV: You know what she'll say.

[Regula I space laboratory]

CAROL (OC): Now let me get this straight. Something you can transplant?
CHEKOV (OC): Yes, Doctor.

[Regula I lab]

CAROL: Something you can transplant? I don't know.
TERRELL (on viewscreen): It might only be a particle of preanimate matter.
CAROL: Then again it may not. You boys have to be clear on this. There can't be so much as a microbe or the show's off. Why don't you have a look? But if it is something that can be moved I want...
TERRELL (on viewscreen): You bet, Doctor. We're on our way!

[Regula I corridor]

DAVID: Well, don't have kittens. Genesis is going to work. They'll remember you in one breath with Newton, Einstein, Surak.
CAROL: Thanks a lot. No respect from my offspring.
DAVID: Par for the course. Are you teaming up with me for bridge after dinner?
CAROL: Maybe. ...What is it?
DAVID: Every time we have dealings with Starfleet, I get nervous. ...We are dealing with something that could be perverted into a dreadful weapon. Remember that overgrown Boy Scout you used to hang around with? That's exactly the kind of man...
CAROL: Listen, kiddo, Jim Kirk was many things, but he was never a Boy Scout!

[Reliant orbiting Ceti Alpha V]

RELIANT VOICE: Captain Terrell, stand by to beam down.

[Surface of Ceti Alpha V]

TERRELL: Chekov, are you sure these are the correct coordinates?
CHEKOV: Captain, this is the garden spot of Ceti Alpha Six.
TERRELL: I can barely see it.
CHEKOV: There's nothing here. The tricorder must be broken.
TERRELL: Chekov, over here. Those look like cargo carriers. Hey, give me a hand.

[Cargo bay]

TERRELL: What the hell happened? If they crashed, where's the rest of the ship?
(looking at a tank with moving sand)
TERRELL: What the hell is that?
CHEKOV: Botany Bay. ...Botany Bay! ...Oh no! We've got to get out of here now! Damn!
TERRELL: What about the...
CHEKOV: Never mind! Hurry! Hurry!
TERRELL: Chekov, what's the matter with you? ...Chekov!
CHEKOV: Come on! Hurry!

(outside they are confronted by a group of hooded figures)

[Reliant bridge]

KYLE: Starship Reliant to Captain Terrell, ...this is Commander Kyle. Will you please respond, Captain? Captain Terrell, respond please.
BEACH: Let's give them a little more time.

[Cargo bay]

CHEKOV: Khan!
KHAN: I don't know you. ...But you, ...I never forget a face, Mister ...Chekov. Isn't it? I never thought to see your face again.
TERRELL: Chekov, who is this man?
CHEKOV: A criminal, Captain, ...a product of late twentieth century genetic engineering.
TERRELL: What do you want with us? Sir, I demand...
KHAN: You are in a position to demand nothing, sir. I, on the other hand, am in a position to grant ...nothing. What you see is all that remains of the ship's company and crew of the Botany Bay, marooned here fifteen years ago by Captain James T. Kirk.
TERRELL: Listen, you men and women, you have a...
KHAN: Captain! Captain! Save your strength. These people have sworn to live and die at my command two hundred years before you were born. Do you mean he never told you the tale? To amuse your Captain? No? Never told you how the Enterprise picked up the Botany Bay, lost in space in the year nineteen hundred and ninety-six, myself and the ship's company in cryogenic freeze?
TERRELL: I've never even met Admiral Kirk.
KHAN: Admiral? Admiral! Admiral... Never told you how Admiral Kirk sent seventy of us into exile on this barren sand heap with only the contents of these cargo bays to sustain us?
CHEKOV: You lie! On Ceti Alpha Five there was life, a fair chance.
KHAN: This is Ceti Alpha Five. ...Ceti Alpha Six exploded six months after we were left here. The shock shifted the orbit of this planet and everything was laid waste. Admiral Kirk ...never bothered to check on our progress. It was only the fact of my genetically engineered intellect that enabled us to survive! On Earth, ...two hundred years ago, ...I was a prince, ...with power over millions.
CHEKOV: Captain Kirk was your host! You repaid his hospitality by trying to steal his ship and murder him.
KHAN: You didn't expect to find me. You thought this was Ceti Alpha Six! Why are you here? ...Why are you here? ...Why? ...Allow me introduce you to Ceti Alpha Five's only remaining indigenous lifeform. ...What do you think? They've killed twenty of my people, including my beloved wife. ...Oh, not all at once, ...and not ...instantly, to be sure. ...You see, their young enter through the ears ...and wrap themselves around the cerebral cortex. This has the effect of rendering the victim extremely susceptible to suggestion. Later, ...they grow, ...follows madness. ...And death.
CHEKOV: Khan, listen to me!
KHAN: These are pets, of course. Not quite domesticated.
CHEKOV: Khan! Captain Kirk was only doing his duty!
TERRELL: No! No!
CHEKOV/TERRELL: (screams of pain)
KHAN: That's better! Now tell me ...why you are here? ...And tell me where I may find James Kirk.

[Space shuttle]

ENTERPRISE VOICE: Enterprise to Admiral Kirk's shuttle. You're cleared for docking. Approach portside torpedo bay.
SULU: Enterprise, this is Admiral Kirk's party on final approach.
ENTERPRISE VOICE: Enterprise welcomes you. Prepare for docking.
KIRK: I hate inspections.
SULU: I'm delighted, any chance to go aboard the Enterprise.
KIRK: Well, I for one am glad to have you at the helm for three weeks. I don't think these kids can steer.

[Enterprise docking bay]

(an ensign sounds a bo'sun's pipe)
SPOCK: Open the Air Lock.
KIRK: Permission to come aboard, Captain?
SPOCK: Welcome, Admiral. I think you know my trainee crew. Certainly they have come to know you.
KIRK: Yes, we've been through death and life together.
KIRK: Mister Scott, you old space dog. You're well?
SCOTT: I had me a wee bout, sir, but Doctor McCoy pulled me through.
KIRK: Oh? A wee bout of what?
McCOY: Shore leave, Admiral.
KIRK: Ah. And who do we have here?
PRESTON: Midshipman First Class Peter Preston, engineers mate, sir!
KIRK: First training voyage, Mister Preston?
PRESTON: Yes sir!
KIRK: Well, ...shall we start with the Engine Room?
SCOTT: We'll see you there, sir, and everything is in order.
KIRK: That'll be a pleasant surprise, Mister Scott.
SPOCK: I'll see you on the bridge, Admiral. Company dismissed!
SAAVIK: (in Vulcan) He's never what I expect, sir.
SPOCK: (in Vulcan) What surprises you, Lieutenant?
SAAVIK: He's so ...human.
SPOCK: (in Vulcan) Nobody's perfect, Saavik.

[Enterprise engineering]

KIRK: Well, Mister Scott, are your cadets capable of handling a minor training cruise?
SCOTT: Give the word, Admiral!
KIRK: Mister Scott, the word is given.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
McCOY: Admiral, what about the rest of the inspection?
KIRK: Later.

[Enterprise bridge]

STARFLEET VOICE: This is Starfleet Operations. Enterprise is cleared for departure.
SULU: Admiral on the bridge!
SAAVIK (OC): Running lights on.
SPOCK: Very well, Mister Saavik, you may clear all moorings.
SAAVIK: Aye sir. ...All moorings are clear, Captain.
SPOCK: Thank you. ...Lieutenant, have you ever piloted a starship out of Spacedock?
SAAVIK: Never, sir.
SPOCK: Take her out, Mister Saavik.
SAAVIK: Aye sir.
SPOCK: For everything there is a first time, Lieutenant. Don't you agree, Admiral?
KIRK: Mmm.
SAAVIK: Aft thrusters, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Aft thrusters.
McCOY: Would you like a tranquilliser?
SAAVIK: Ahead one-quarter impulse power.
SULU: Ahead one-quarter impulse power.
(the Enterprise leaves Spacedock)
SULU: We are clear and free to navigate.
SAAVIK: Course heading, Captain?
KIRK: Captain's discretion.
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, you may ...indulge yourself.
SULU: Aye sir.

[Regula I space laboratory]

DAVID: Does that about do it?
CAROL: I don't think there's another piece of information we could squeeze into the memory banks. Next time, we'll design a bigger one.
DAVID: Who'd wanna build it?
JEDDA: Doctor Marcus, Comm-pic coming in on hyperchannel. ...It's the Starship Reliant.
CAROL: On the screen, please, Jedda.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): Come in, please. This is Reliant calling Regula I. Repeat. This is U.S.S. Reliant.
CAROL: Commander, we are receiving. This is Regula I. Go ahead.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): Ah! Doctor Marcus, ...good. We're en route to you and should be there in three days.
CAROL: En route? Why? We weren't expecting you for another three months. Has something happened?
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): Nothing has happened. Ceti Alpha Six has checked out.
CAROL: Then I ...I don't understand why you're coming...
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): We have received new orders. Upon our arrival at Regula I, all materials of Project Genesis will be transferred to this ship for immediate testing at Ceti Alpha Six.
DAVID: (and others) Who the hell, do they think they are?
CAROL: Will you please be quiet! Commander Chekov, this is completely irregular.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): I have my orders.
DAVID: Pin him down, Mother. Who gave the order?
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): The order comes from Admiral James T. Kirk.
DAVID: I knew it! I knew it! All along the military has wanted to get their han...
CAROL: This is completely improper, Commander Chekov. I have no intention of allowing Reliant or any other unauthorised personnel access to our work or materials.
CHEKOV (on viewscreen): I'm sorry that you feel that way, Doctor. Admiral Kirk's orders are confirmed.

[Reliant bridge]

CHEKOV: Please prepare to deliver Genesis to us upon our arrival. Reliant out.
KHAN: Well done, Commander.
CHEKOV: You realise, sir, they will attempt to contact Admiral Kirk and confirm the order.

[Enterprise turbolift]

SAAVIK: Hold please! ...Thank you, sir.
KIRK: Lieutenant, are you wearing your hair differently?
SAAVIK: It is still regulation, Admiral. ...May I speak, sir?
KIRK: Self-expression doesn't seem to be one of your problems. ...You're bothered by your performance on the Kobayashi Maru.
SAAVIK: I failed to resolve the situation.
KIRK: There is no correct resolution. It's a test of character.
SAAVIK: May I ask how you dealt with the test?
KIRK: You may ask. ...That's a little joke.
SAAVIK: Humour. It is a difficult concept. ...It is not logical.
KIRK: We learn by doing.
McCOY: Who's been holding up the damn elevator?
SAAVIK: Thank you, sir.
McCOY: Did she change her hairstyle?
KIRK: I hadn't noticed.
McCOY: Wonderful stuff, that Romulan ale.
UHURA (on intercom): Admiral Kirk.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA (on intercom): I have an urgent Comm-pic from Space Lab Regula I for you, sir. Doctor Carol Marcus.
KIRK: I'll take it in my quarters, Uhura.
UHURA (on intercom): Aye sir.
McCOY: It never rains but it pours.
KIRK: As a physician you of all people should appreciate the danger of re-opening old wounds.
McCOY: Sorry.

[Kirk's quarters]

CAROL (on viewscreen): Jim, can you read me?
KIRK: I can hear you, Carol. What's wrong? What's the matter?
CAROL (on viewscreen): Why are you taking Genesis away from us?
KIRK: Taking Genesis? Who's taking Genesis? Who is taking Genesis?
CAROL (on viewscreen): I can see you but can't hear.
KIRK: Carol!
CAROL (on viewscreen): Jim, did you give the order?
KIRK: What order? Who's taking Genesis?
CAROL (on viewscreen): Please help us. I will not let them have Genesis without proper authorisation!
KIRK: Have Genesis? Who gav...
CAROL (on viewscreen): On whose authority can they do this?
KIRK: No one's authority.
CAROL (on viewscreen): Please do something.
KIRK: Uhura! What's happening? Damn it.
UHURA (on intercom): Transmission jammed at the source, sir.
KIRK: Alert Starfleet Headquarters.
UHURA (on intercom): Aye sir.
KIRK: I want to talk to Starfleet Command.

[Regula I space laboratory]

CAROL (OC): We must have order here. This has to be some sort of mistake.
DAVID: Mistake? We're all alone here. They waited until everyone was on leave to do this. Reliant is supposed to be at our disposal, not vice-versa.
MADISON: It seems clear that Starfleet never intended that.
CAROL: I that know, but...
DAVID: I've tried to tell you before. Scientists have always been pawns of the military.
CAROL: Starfleet has kept the peace for a hundred. I cannot and will not subscribe to your interpretation of this event.
JEDDA: You may be right, Doctor, but what about Reliant? She's on her way.

[Spock's quarters]

KIRK (OC): We've got a problem. Something may be wrong at Regula I. We've been ordered to investigate.
SPOCK: If memory serves, Regula I is a scientific research laboratory.
KIRK (OC): I told Starfleet all we had was a boatload of children but ...we're the only ship in the Quadrant. Spock, these cadets of yours, how good are they? How will they respond under real pressure?
SPOCK: As with all living things, each according to his gifts. Of course, the ship is yours.
KIRK: No, that won't be necessary, just get me to Regula I.
SPOCK: As a teacher on a training mission, I am content to command the Enterprise. If we are to go on actual duty, it is clear that the senior officer on board must assume command.
KIRK: It may be nothing, ...garbled communications. You take the ship.
SPOCK: Jim, you proceed from a false assumption. I am a Vulcan. I have no ego to bruise.
KIRK (OC): You're about to remind me that logic alone dictates your actions.
SPOCK: I would not remind you of that which you know so well. If I may be so bold, it was a mistake for you to accept promotion. Commanding a starship is your first best destiny. Anything else is a waste of material.
KIRK: I would not presume to debate you.
SPOCK: That is wise. In any case, were I to invoke logic, logic clearly dictates that the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few.
KIRK: Or the one.
SPOCK: You are my superior officer. You are also my friend. I have been and always shall be yours.

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Stop energisers.
SULU (OC): Stop energisers.
KIRK: Prepare speakers. ...An emergency situation has arisen. By order of Starfleet Command, as of now, eighteen hundred hours, I am assuming command of this vessel. Duty officer so note in the ship's log. Plot a new course, for Space Laboratory Regula I. Engine room. Mister Scott!
SCOTT (on intercom): Aye sir.
KIRK: We'll be going to warp speed.
SCOTT (on intercom): Aye sir.
SULU: Course plotted for Regula I, Admiral.
KIRK: Engage warp engines.
SAAVIK: Prepare for warp speed.
SULU: Ready, sir.
KIRK: I know that none of you were expecting this. I'm sorry. I'm gonna have you to ask you to grow up a little sooner than you expected. Warp five.
SULU: So much for the little training cruise.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN'S NAVIGATOR (OC): Course to intercept Enterprise ready, sir.
KHAN: Helmsman?
JOACHIM: Sir. May I speak? ...We're all with you, sir, but consider this. We are free. We have a ship and the means to go where we will. We have escaped permanent exile on Ceti Alpha Five. You have proved your superior intellect, and defeated the plans of Admiral Kirk. You do not need to defeat him again.
KHAN: He tasks me. He tasks me and I shall have him. I'll chase him round the moons of Nibia and round the Antares maelstrom and round perdition's flames before I give him up. ...Prepare to alter course.

[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Space Station Regula I. Please come in. Doctor Marcus. Please respond. This is Enterprise call... It's no use, there's no response from Regula I.
SPOCK: But no longer jammed?
UHURA: No sir. No nothing!
SPOCK: There are two possibilities. They are unable to respond. They are unwilling to respond.
KIRK: How far?
SPOCK: Twelve hours and forty-three minutes, present speed.
KIRK: Give up Genesis, she said. What in God's name does that mean? Give it up to whom?
SPOCK: It might help my analysis if I knew what Genesis was beyond the biblical reference.
KIRK: Uhura, have Doctor McCoy to join us in my quarters.
UHURA (OC): Aye sir.
KIRK: Mister Saavik, you have the con.

[Kirk's quarters]

McCOY: Well, I've got the sick bay ready. Now will someone please tell me what's going on?
KIRK: Computer. Request security procedure and access to Project Genesis Summary.
COMPUTER VOICE: Identify for retina scan.
KIRK: Kirk, Admiral James T.
COMPUTER VOICE: Security scan approved.
KIRK: Summary, please.
CAROL (on viewscreen): Project Genesis. A proposal to the Federation.
SPOCK: Carol Marcus.
KIRK: Yes.
CAROL (on viewscreen): What exactly is Genesis? Well, put simply, Genesis is life from lifelessness. It is a process whereby molecular structure is reorganised at he subatomic level into life-generating matter of equal mass. Stage One of our experiments was conducted in the laboratory. Stage Two of the series will be attempted in a lifeless underground. Stage Three will involve the process on a planetary scale. It is our intention to introduce the Genesis device into the pre-selected area of a lifeless space body, such a moon or other dead form. The device is delivered, instantaneously causing what we call the Genesis Effect. Matter is reorganised with life-generating results. ...Instead of a dead moon, a living, breathing planet, capable of sustaining whatever lifeforms we see fit to deposit on it.
SPOCK: Fascinating!
CAROL: (on viewscreen) The reformed moon simulated here represents the merest fraction of the Genesis potential, should the Federation wish to fund these experiments to their logical conclusion. When we consider the cosmic problems of population and food supply, the usefulness of this process becomes clear. This concludes our proposal. Thank you for your attention.
SPOCK: It literally is Genesis.
KIRK: The power of creation.
SPOCK: Have they proceeded with their experiment?
KIRK: Well, the tape was made about a year ago. I can only assume they've reached Stage Two by now.
McCOY: But, dear Lord, do you think we're intelligent enough to... Suppose, what if this thing were used where life already exists?
SPOCK: It would destroy such life in favour of its new matrix.
McCOY: It's new matrix? ...Do you have you any idea what you're saying?
SPOCK: I was not attempting to evaluate its moral implications, Doctor. As a matter of cosmic history, it has always been easier to destroy than to create.
McCOY: Not anymore! Now we can do both at the same time! According to myth, the Earth was created in six days. Now, watch out! Here comes Genesis, we'll do it for you in six minutes.
SPOCK: Really, Doctor McCoy, you must learn to govern your passions. They will be your undoing. Logic suggests...
McCOY: Logic? My God! The man's talking about logic! We're talking about universal Armageddon, you green-blooded, inhuman...
SAAVIK (on intercom): Bridge to Admiral Kirk. Admiral, sensors indicate a vessel in our area, closing fast.
KIRK: What do you make of her?
SAAVIK (on intercom): It's one of ours, Admiral. ...It's Reliant.
KIRK: Reliant!

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Try the emergency channels. ...Picture, Mister Saavik.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Slow to one-half impulse power. Let's be friends.
HELMSMAN: Slowing to one-half impulse power.

[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Reliant in our section, this Quadrant, sir, and slowing.
SAAVIK: Sir, may I quote General Order Twelve, 'On the approach of any vessel, when communications have not been established...
SPOCK: Lieutenant, the Admiral is well aware of the Regulations.
SAAVIK: Aye sir.
KIRK (OC): Is it possible that their Comm system has failed?
SPOCK (OC): It would explain a great many things.

[Reliant bridge]

JOACHIM: They're requesting communications, sir.
KHAN: Let them eat static!
JOACHIM (OC): They're still running with shields down.
KHAN: Of course. We're one big happy fleet. Ah, Kirk, my old friend, do you know the Klingon proverb that tells us 'Revenge is a dish that is best served cold?' It is very cold ...in space.

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: This is damned peculiar. ...Yellow Alert.
SAAVIK: Energise defence fields.
UHURA: I'm getting a voice message. They say their Chambers coil is overloading their Comm system.
KIRK: Spock?
SPOCK: Scanning. Their coil emissions are normal.

[Reliant bridge]

JOACHIM: They still haven't raised their shields.
KHAN: Raise ours.
JOACHIM: Their shields are going up
KHAN: Lock phasers on target.
JOACHIM: Locking phasers on target.

[Enterprise bridge]

SPOCK: They're locking phasers!
KIRK: Raise shields!

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Fire!

(explosions rips through the Enterprise)

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Sulu! Get Those shields up.
SULU: Trying, sir!
(scenes of chaos in engineering)
SULU: I can't get power, sir!
KIRK: Scotty! Uhura, turn off those damn channels!
UHURA: Mister Scott on the screen, sir.

[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: We're just hanging on, sir. The main energisers out.
KIRK (on intercom): Try auxiliary power.
SCOTT: Aye sir.

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Damage report.
SPOCK: They knew exactly where to hit us.
KIRK: Who? Who knew just where to hit us? And why?
SPOCK: One thing is certain, we cannot escape on auxiliary power.
KIRK: Visual! ...Sulu, divert all power to phasers.
SPOCK (OC): Too late.
KIRK: Hang on!
(the Enterprise bridge is hit as the Reliant circles)
KIRK: Scotty, ...what's left?
SCOTT (on intercom): Just the batteries, sir. I can have auxiliary power in a few minutes.
KIRK: We don't have a few minutes. ...Can you give me phaser power?
SCOTT (on intercom): A few shots, sir.
SPOCK: Not enough against their shields.
KIRK: Who the hell are they?
UHURA: Admiral! The commander Reliant is signalling. He wishes to discuss terms of our surrender.
KIRK: Visual on screen.
UHURA (OC): Admiral?
KIRK: Do it, while we have time.
UHURA (OC): On screen, sir.
KIRK: Khan!
KHAN (on viewscreen): You still remember, Admiral. I, of cannot help but be touched. Of course, I remember you.
KIRK: What is the meaning of this attack? Where is the crew of the Reliant?
KHAN (on viewscreen): Surely I have made my meaning plain. I mean to avenge myself upon you, Admiral. I've deprived your ship of power and when I swing round I mean to deprive you of your life. But I wanted you to know first who it was who had beaten you.
KIRK: Khan, ...if its me you want, I'll have myself beamed aboard. Spare my crew!
KHAN (on viewscreen): I make you a counter-proposal, I will agree to your terms, ...if, ...if in addition to yourself, you hand over to me all data and material regarding the project called ...Genesis.
KIRK: Genesis, what's that?
KHAN (on viewscreen): Don't insult my intelligence, Kirk.
KIRK: Give me some time to recall the data on our computers.
KHAN (on viewscreen): I give you sixty seconds, Admiral.
KIRK: Clear the bridge.
SPOCK: At least we know he doesn't have Genesis.
KIRK: Keep nodding as though I'm still giving orders. Mister Saavik, punch up the data charts of Reliant's command console.
SAAVIK: Reliant's command...
KIRK: Hurry!
COUNTDOWN VOICE: Forty-five seconds.
SPOCK: The prefix code?
KIRK: It's all we've got.
SAAVIK: The chart's up, sir.
KHAN (on viewscreen): Admiral!
KIRK: We're finding it.
KHAN (on viewscreen): Admiral!
KIRK: Please, please ... give us time, ...the bridge is smashed, computers inoperative.
KHAN: Time is a luxury you don't have, Admiral.
KIRK: Damn!
KHAN (on viewscreen): Admiral!
KIRK: It's coming through now, Khan.
SPOCK: Reliant's prefix number is one six three zero nine.
SAAVIK: I don't understand.
KIRK: You have to learn why things work on a starship.
SPOCK: Each ship has its combination code.
KIRK: To prevent an enemy do what we're attempting. Using our console to order Reliant to lower her shields.
SPOCK: Assuming he hasn't changed the combination. He's quite intelligent.
COUNTDOWN VOICE: Fifteen seconds.
KIRK: Khan, how do I know you'll keep your word?
KHAN (on viewscreen): Oh, I've given you no word to keep, Admiral. In my judgment, you simply have no alternative.
KIRK: I see your point. Stand by to receive our transmission. ...Mister Sulu, lock phasers on target and await my command.
SULU: Phasers locked.
KHAN (on viewscreen): Time's up, Admiral.
KIRK: Here it comes. Now, Mister Spock.

[Reliant bridge]

JOACHIM: Sir! Our shields are dropping!
KHAN: Raise them.
JOACHIM: I can't!
KHAN: Where's the over-ride? The over-ride?

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Fire! ...Fire!

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Fire! Fire!
JOACHIM: We can't fire, sir!
KHAN: Why can't you?
JOACHIM: They've damaged the photon-control and the warp drive. We must withdraw.
KHAN: No! No!
JOACHIM: Sir, we must! ...The Enterprise can wait. She's not going anywhere.

[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Sir, you did it.
KIRK: I did nothing ...except get caught with my britches down. I must be senile. Mister Saavik, you go right on quoting regulations! In the meantime, let's find out how badly we've been hurt.
(Scotty stands in the turbolift doors holding the body of Midshipman Preston)

[Enterprise sickbay]

PRESTON: Is the word given, Admiral?
KIRK: The word is given. Warp speed.
PRESTON: Aye.
SCOTT: He stayed at his post ...when the trainees ran.
SPOCK (on intercom): Admiral, this is Spock.
KIRK: Yes, Spock.
SPOCK (on intercom): Engine room reports auxiliary power restored. We can proceed at impulse power.
KIRK: Best speed to Regula I. Kirk out.
McCOY: I'm sorry, Scotty.

[Regula I space laboratory - exterior]

SULU (OC): Approaching Regula and Space Lab Regula I.
UHURA (OC): Space Station Regula I, this is Starship Enterprise. Please, come in.

[Regula I space laboratory]

UHURA (on viewscreen): Space Station Regula I. Do you read? ...Space Station Regula I, this is Enterprise. Please acknowledge.

[Regula I space laboratory - exterior]

UHURA (OC): This is Enterprise. Do you read me? ...Space Station Regula I, do you read? Please come in.

[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: No response, sir.
KIRK: Sensors, Captain?
SPOCK: Scanners and sensors still inoperative. There's no way to ascertain what's inside the station.
KIRK: And no way of telling if Reliant is still in the area.
SPOCK: Precisely.
KIRK: What do you make of the planetoid beyond?
SPOCK (OC): Regula is class 'D'. It consists of various unremarkable ores. Essentially, a great rock in space.
KIRK: Reliant could be hiding behind that rock.
SPOCK: A distinct possibility.
KIRK: Engine room.
SCOTT (on intercom): Aye sir.
KIRK: Mister Scott, do we have enough power for the transporters?
SCOTT (on intercom): Barely, sir.
KIRK: I'm going down there.
McCOY: Khan could be down there!
KIRK: He's been there, hasn't found what he wants. Can you spare someone? There may be people hurt.
McCOY: I can spare me.
SAAVIK: Begging the Admiral's pardon, General Order Fifteen. 'No flag officer shall beam into a hazardous area without armed escort.'
KIRK: There is no such regulation. ...All right, join the party. Mister Spock, the ship is yours.
SPOCK: Jim, be careful!
McCOY: We will!

[Regula I space laboratory]

SAAVIK: Indeterminate life signs.
KIRK: Phasers on stun. ...Move out.
(a rat startles Bones. When he turns back, he bumps into bodies hanging by their feet)
McCOY: Jim! ...Well rigor hasn't set in. This couldn't have happened too long ago, Jim.
KIRK: Carol?

[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: This is Enterprise calling Space Lab Regula I. Respond please.

[Regula I space laboratory]

SAAVIK: Admiral! Over here.
UHURA (on intercom): Doctor Marcus, come in please.
(Kirk opens a locker)
KIRK: Oh, my God!

[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Please acknowledge signal. Please...
SAAVIK (on intercom): Commander Uhura, this is Lieutenant Saavik. We're all right. Please stand by. Out.

[Regula I space laboratory]

CHEKOV: Oh, sir! It was Khan! We found him on Ceti Alpha V. ...He... He ...put ...creatures in our bodies to control our minds,...
McCOY: It's all right. You're safe now.
CHEKOV: ...made us say lies, ...do things. ...But we beat him. ...He thought he controlled us, but he did not. The Captain was strong.
KIRK: Captain. Where's Doctor Marcus? Where are the Genesis materials?
TERRELL: He couldn't find them. Even the data banks were empty.
KIRK: Erased?
TERRELL: He tortured those people. But none of those people would tell him anything. He went wild. He slit their throats. He wanted to tear the place apart, but he was late. He had to get back to Reliant in time to blow you to bits.
SAAVIK: Where is the Reliant crew? Dead?
TERRELL: Marooned on Ceti Alpha Five. He's completely mad, Admiral. He blames you for the death of his wife.
KIRK: I know what he blames me for. ...The escape pods are all in place. Where's the transporter room?

[Regula transporter room]

KIRK: Did he make it down here?
CHEKOV: It was not my impression. He spent most of his time trying to wring information out of the people.
SAAVIK: Anything?
KIRK: The unit's been left on. Which means that nobody remained to turn it off.
McCOY: Those people back there bought escape time for Genesis with their lives.
SAAVIK: This is not logical. These coordinates are deep inside Regula, ...a planetoid we know to be lifeless.
KIRK: If Stage Two was completed, it was going to be underground. ...It was going to be underground, she said.
SAAVIK: Stage Two of what?
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.
SPOCK (on intercom): Spock here.
KIRK: Captain Spock, damage report.
SPOCK (on intercom): Admiral, if we go by the book, like Lieutenant Saavik, hours could seem like days.
KIRK: I read you, Captain. Let's have it.
SPOCK (on intercom): The situation is grave, Admiral. We won't have main power for six days. Auxiliary power has temporarily failed. Restoration may be possible in two days, ...by the book, Admiral
KIRK: Meaning you can't even beam us back?
SPOCK (on intercom): Not at present.
KIRK: Captain Spock, if you don't hear from us within one hour, your orders are to restore what power you can, take the Enterprise to the nearest Starbase and alert Starfleet command as soon as you're out of jamming range.
UHURA (on intercom: Sir, ...we won't leave you behind!
KIRK: Uhura, if you don't hear from us, there won't be anybody behind. Kirk out. ...Well, gentleman can stay here, or...
TERRELL: If it's all the same, Admiral, we'd like to share the risk.
KIRK: Right! Let's go. ...Saavik.
McCOY: Go? Where are we going?
KIRK: Where they went.
McCOY: Suppose they went nowhere.
KIRK: Then this'll be your big chance to get away from it all.

[Regula I cavern]

SAAVIK: Admiral...
McCOY: Genesis, I presume.
JEDDA: Phasers down!
DAVID: You!
(Kirk and David fight)
KIRK: Where's Doctor Marcus?
DAVID: I'm Doctor Marcus!
CAROL (OC): Jim!
KIRK: Is that David?
DAVID: Mother! He killed everybody we left behind.
CAROL: Oh, of course he didn't. David, you're just making this harder.
TERRELL: I'm afraid it's even harder than you think, Doctor. Please ...don't move.
KIRK: Chekov!
CHEKOV: I'm sorry, Admiral.
TERRELL: Your excellency, have you been listening?

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: I have indeed, Captain. You have done well.
DAVID: I knew it! You son-of-a-bitch!
(Terrell fires, vaporising Jedda)
TERRELL: Don't move ...anybody!

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Captain, ...we're waiting. What's the delay?

[Regula I cavern]

TERRELL: All is well, sir. You have the coordinates to beam up Genesis.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: First things first, Captain. ...Kill Admiral Kirk.

[Regula I cavern]

TERRELL: Sir, that it is difficult. I ...try to obey, but...

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Kill him.

[Regula I cavern]

TERRELL: I...
KHAN (on intercom): Kill him, Terrell, now!
(Terrell vaporises himself. Chekov collapses)
McCOY: God's sakes! What is it?
(Kirk vaporises Chekov's Ceti eel)
KIRK: Khan, you bloodsucker.

[Reliant bridge]

KIRK (on intercom): You're gonna have to do your own dirty work now. Do you hear me? Do you?
KHAN: Kirk! Kirk, you are still alive... my old friend.

[Regula I cavern]

KIRK: Still, 'old friend'. You've managed to kill just about everyone else, but like a poor marksman, you keep missing the target.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Perhaps I no longer need to try, Admiral.

[Reliant bridge]

DAVID: No! ...He can't take it!
KIRK: Khan! Khan, you have Genesis, but you don't have me!

[Reliant bridge]

KIRK (on intercom): You were going to kill me, Khan. You're going to have to come down here! You're going to have to come down here!
KHAN: I've done far worse than kill you, ...I've hurt you. And I wish to go on ...hurting you. I shall leave you as you left me. As you left her. Marooned for all eternity in the center of a dead planet, ...buried alive. Buried alive!

[Regula I cavern]

KIRK: Khan! Kahn!

[Regula I cavern]

SAAVIK: This is Lieutenant. Saavik, calling Enterprise. Can you read us? ...This is Lieutenant. Saavik, calling Enterprise. Can you read us?
McCOY: He's coming around.
KIRK: Pavel?
SAAVIK: Can you read us? It's no use, Admiral, they're still jamming all channels.
McCOY: If Enterprise followed orders she's long since gone. If she couldn't obey, she's finished.
DAVID: So are we, it looks like.
CAROL: I don't understand. Who's responsible for all this? ...Who is Khan?
KIRK: Well, it's a long story.
DAVID: We appear to have plenty of time.
KIRK: Is there anything to eat? I don't know about anyone else, but I'm starved.
McCOY: How can you think of food at a time like this?
KIRK: First order of business, survival.
CAROL: There is food in the Genesis cave, enough to last a lifetime, ...if necessary.
McCOY: We thought this was Genesis.
CAROL: This? It took the Starfleet Corps of Engineers ten months in space suits to tunnel out all this. What we did in there ...we did in a day. David, why don't you show Doctor McCoy and the Lieutenant our idea of food?
DAVID: We can't just sit here!
KIRK: Oh, yes we can.
DAVID: This is just to give us something to do, isn't it? ...Come on.
SAAVIK: Admiral?
KIRK: As your teacher Mister Spock is fond of saying, 'I like to think there always are ...possibilities.'
(Saavik leaves)
KIRK: I did what you wanted. ...I stayed away. ...Why didn't you tell him?
CAROL: How can you ask me that? Were we together? Were we going to be? You had your world and I had mine. And I wanted him in mine, not chasing through the universe with his father. ... Actually, he's a lot like you. In many ways. Please tell me what you're feeling.
KIRK: There's a man out there I haven't seen in fifteen years who's trying to kill me. You show me a son that'd be happy to help him. My son. ...My life that could have been, ...and wasn't. And what am I feeling? ...Old. ...Worn out.
CAROL: Let me show you something ...that'll make you feel young as when the world was new.

[Reliant bridge]

JOACHIM: Impulse power restored.
KHAN: Excellent! More than a match for poor Enterprise.

[Genesis cave]

KIRK: You did all this in a day?
CAROL: The matrix formed in a day. The lifeforms grew later at a ...substantially accelerated rate.
McCOY: Jim! This is incredible. Have you ever seen the like?
CAROL: Can I cook or can't I?

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Where is she?

[Genesis cave]

SAAVIK: Sir, may I ask you a question?
KIRK: What's on your mind, Lieutenant?
SAAVIK: The Kobayashi Maru, sir.
KIRK: Are you asking me if we are playing out that scenario now?
SAAVIK: On the test, sir, will you tell me what you did? I would really like to know.
McCOY: Lieutenant, you are looking at the only Starfleet cadet who ever beat the no-win scenario.
SAAVIK: How?
KIRK: I reprogrammed the simulation so it was possible to rescue the ship.
SAAVIK: What?
DAVID: He cheated!
KIRK: I changed the conditions of the test. I got a commendation for original thinking. ...I don't like to lose.
SAAVIK: Then you never faced that situation, ...faced death.
KIRK: I don't believe in a no-win scenario. ...Kirk to Spock. It's two hours. Are you about ready?
SPOCK (on intercom): Right on schedule, Admiral. Just give us your coordinates and we'll beam you aboard.
KIRK: All right. I don't like to lose.

[Enterprise transporter room]

SAAVIK: But the damage report? ...We were immobilised. Captain Spock said it would be two days.
KIRK: Come, come, Lieutenant, you of all people go by the book. Spock! You remember Doctor Marcus.
SPOCK: Why, of course.
CAROL: Hello, Mister Spock.
McCOY: I'm taking this bunch to sickbay.
SAAVIK: By the book?
KIRK: By the book! Regulation forty-six A, 'If transmissions are being monitored during battle...'
SAAVIK: '...no uncoded messages on an open channel.' ...You lied.
SPOCK: I exaggerated.
KIRK: Hours instead of days, Saavik, now we have minutes instead of hours.

[Enterprise corridors]

SPOCK: They're inoperative below C-deck.
KIRK: What is working around here?
SPOCK: Not much, Admiral. We have partial main power.
KIRK: That's it?
SPOCK: Best we could do in two hours.

[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Admiral on the bridge.
KIRK: Battle stations. ...Tactical. ...Uh oh.
SPOCK: She can out-run us and out-gun us. But there is the Mutara Nebula at one five three mark four.
KIRK: Scotty, can we make it inside?
SCOTT: The energiser's bypassed like a Christmas tree, ...so don't give me too many bumps.
KIRK: No promises. On your way.
SAAVIK: Trouble with the nebula, sir, is all that static discharge and gas clouds our tactical display. Visual won't function and shields will be useless.
SPOCK: Sauce for the goose, Mister Saavik. The odds will be even.
(the crew prepare the Enterprise for battle)

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: There she is! There she is! ...Not so wounded as we were led to believe. So much the better.

[Enterprise bridge]

SPOCK: Estimating nebula penetration in two point two minutes. Reliant is closing.
KIRK: Steady as you go.

[Reliant bridge]

JOACHIM: If they go in there we'll lose them.
KHAN: Explain it to them.

[Enterprise bridge]

SAAVIK: That was close.
KIRK: They just don't want us going in there.
SPOCK: One minute to nebula perimeter.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Why are we slowing?
JOACHIM: We daren't follow them into the nebula, sir, ...our shields will be useless.

[Enterprise bridge]

SPOCK: they are reducing speed.
KIRK: Uhura, patch me in.
UHURA (OC): Aye sir. ...You're on, Admiral.

[Reliant bridge]

KIRK (on intercom): This is Admiral Kirk. We tried it once your way, Khan. Are you game for a rematch? ...Khan! I'm laughing at the 'superior intellect'.
KHAN: Full impulse power!
JOACHIM: No sir! You have Genesis. ... You can have whatever you ...
KHAN: Full power, damn you!

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: I'll say this for him, he's consistent.
SPOCK: We are now entering the Mutara Nebula.
KIRK: Emergency lights.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Tactical!
JOACHIM: Inoperative.
KHAN (OC): Raise the shields.
JOACHIM: As I feared, sir. Not functional. I'm reducing speed.
(Enterprise passes above the Reliant at right-angles and starts to turn downwards)

[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Target, sir? Phaser lock inoperative, sir.
KIRK: Best guess, Mister Sulu. Fire when ready.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Aft-torpedoes ...fire!

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Hold your course. ...Evasive starboard!
(Enterprise takes phaser fire from Reliant)

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Fire!
(Reliant suffers damage)

[Enterprise engineering]

KIRK (on intercom): Damage, Mister Scott?
SCOTT: Admiral, I've got to take the mains off the line. The radiation...
McCOY: Scotty!

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: Joachim!
JOACHIM: Yours ...is ...the superior...
KHAN: I shall avenge you.

[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Could you use another hand, Admiral?
KIRK: Man the weapons console, Mister Chekov. ...Spock?
SPOCK: Sporadic energy readings port side, aft. Could be an impulse turn.
KIRK: He won't break off now. He followed me this far, he'll be back. But from where?
SPOCK: He's intelligent, but not experienced. His pattern indicates ...two-dimensional thinking.
KIRK: Full stop.
SULU: Full stop, sir.
KIRK: Zee minus ten thousand metres. Stand by photon torpedoes.
(Enterprise again passes above Reliant and circles to come up behind her)
CHEKOV: Torpedoes ready, sir.
KIRK: Look sharp. ...Fire! ...Fire!
(Reliant is hit and loses its port nacelle)

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Uhura, send to Commander, Reliant, 'Prepare to be boarded'.
UHURA: Aye sir. ...Commander, Reliant, this is Enterprise...

[Reliant bridge]

UHURA (on intercom): ...Surrender and prepare to be boarded. Enterprise to Reliant, you are ordered to surrender your vessel. Respond. ...Reliant! Come in, Reliant. You are ordered to surrender your vessel.

[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Enterprise to Reliant, you are ordered to surrender your vessel. Respond.

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: No, Kirk. ...The game's not over. ...To the last I will grapple with thee!
(Khan activates the Genesis device)

[Enterprise bridge]

SPOCK: Admiral. Scanning an energy source on Reliant. A pattern I've never seen before.
DAVID: It's the Genesis Wave!
KIRK: What?
DAVID: They're on a build up to detonation!
KIRK: How soon.
DAVID: We encoded four minutes.
KIRK: We'll beam aboard and stop it.
DAVID: You can't!
KIRK: Scotty, I need warp speed in three minutes or we're all dead!
UHURA (on intercom): No response, Admiral.
KIRK: Scotty!
KIRK: Get us out of here, best speed possible!
SULU: Aye sir.
(Spock leaves the bridge)

[Enterprise engineering]

(Spock arrives in engineering. Scott and an engineer are slumped on the floor)
McCOY: Are you out of your Vulcan mind? No human can tolerate the radiation that's in there!
SPOCK: But, as you are so fond of observing, Doctor, I'm not human.
McCOY: You're not going in there!
SPOCK: Perhaps you're right. What is Mister Scott's condition?
McCOY: Well, I don't think that he...
(Spock administers a Vulcan nerve pinch on McCoy)
SPOCK: I'm sorry, Doctor. I have no time to discuss this logically. ...Remember!
SCOTT: Spock! Get out of there! Spock!

[Enterprise reactor room]

SCOTT (OC): Spock! Get out of there!

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Time from my mark.
SAAVIK: Two minutes, ten seconds.
KIRK: Engine room! What's happening?

[Enterprise reactor room]

SCOTT: You dumb ninny! Get out of there! ...No, God, don't!

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Time?
SAAVIK: Three minutes, thirty seconds.
KIRK: Distance from Reliant.
CHEKOV: Four hundred kilometres.
SULU: We're not going to make it, are we?

[Reliant bridge]

KHAN: No! ...No! You can't get away. ...From Hell's heart, ...I stab at thee. For hate's sake I spit my last breath ...at thee.

[Enterprise bridge]

CADET: Sir! The mains are back on line!
KIRK: Bless you, Scotty. Go, Sulu!
(Regula I explodes as Enterprise flees the radiating Genesis rings)

[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: My God, Carol. Look at it. ...Engine Room. Well done. Scotty?
McCOY (on intercom): Jim, I think you'd better get down here.
KIRK: Bones?
McCOY (on intercom): Better hurry!
KIRK: Saavik, take the con.

[Enterprise engineering]

McCOY: No! You'll flood the whole compartment!
KIRK: He'll die!
SCOTT: Sir! He's dead already.
McCOY: It's too late, Jim.
KIRK: Spock!
SPOCK: Ship ...out of danger?
KIRK: Yes.
SPOCK: Don't grieve, Admiral, ...it is logical. The needs of the many ...outweigh
KIRK: ...the needs of the few.
SPOCK: Or the one. ... I never took the Kobayashi Maru test ...until now. What do you think of my solution?
KIRK: Spock!
SPOCK: I have been ...and always shall be ...your friend. ...Live long ...and prosper.
KIRK: No!

[Torpedo bay]

KIRK (OC): We are assembled here today to pay final respects to our honoured dead. And yet it should be noted that in the midst of our sorrow, this death takes place in the shadow of new life, the sunrise of a new world, a world that our beloved comrade gave his life to protect and nourish. He did not feel that sacrifice a vain or empty one... and we will not debate his profound wisdom at these proceedings. Of my friend, I can only say this. Of all the souls I have encountered in my travels, ...his was the most ...human.
SULU (OC): Honours, ...hup!
(bagpipes play 'Amazing Grace' as the torpedo coffin is fired)

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Come.
DAVID: I don't mean to intrude.
KIRK: No, not at all. ...I should be on the bridge.
DAVID: Can I talk to you for a minute?
KIRK: I've poured myself a drink. Would you like it?
DAVID: Lieutenant Saavik was right. You never have faced a death.
KIRK: No, not like this. I haven't faced death. I've cheated death. I tricked my way out of death ...and patted myself on the back for my ingenuity. ...I know nothing.
DAVID: You knew enough to tell Saavik that how we face death is at least as important as how we face life.
KIRK: Just words.
DAVID: But good words. That's where ideas begin. Maybe you should listen to them. I was wrong about you and I'm sorry.
KIRK: Is that what you came here to say?
DAVID: Mainly. ...And also that I'm ...proud, ...very proud ...to be your son.

Captain's log, stardate 8141.6. Starship Enterprise departing for Ceti Alpha Five to pick up the crew of the U.S.S. Reliant. All is well. And yet I can't help wondering about the friend I leave behind. 'There are always possibilities' Spock said. And if Genesis is indeed 'Life from death', I must return to this place again.


[Enterprise bridge]

McCOY: He's really not dead. As long as we remember him.
KIRK: 'It's a far, far better thing I do than I have ever done before. ...A far better resting place that I go to than I have ever known'.
CAROL: Is that a poem?
KIRK: No, no. Something Spock was trying to tell me. On my birthday.
McCOY: You okay, Jim? How do you feel?
KIRK: Young. I feel young.

(the torpedo coffin lays in a clearing in the new, verdant forest on the Genesis planet)

Spock's Voice: Space, the final frontier. ...These are the continuing voyages of the Starship Enterprise. ...Her ongoing mission, to explore strange new worlds, ...to seek out new lifeforms and new civilisations. ...To boldly go where no man has gone before.





(three Klingon battle cruisers approach a luminescent Cloud)
[Klingon bridge]

KLINGON CAPTAIN: (In Klingonese) Tactical.
(the battle cruisers overfly the Cloud)
KLINGON CAPTAIN: (In Klingonese) Visual.
(the Cloud on the viewscreen)
KLINGON CAPTAIN: (In Klingonese) Tactical. Stand by on torpedoes. ...Ready. ...Fire!
(the battle cruisers fire photon torpedoes at the Cloud)
KLINGON CAPTAIN: (In Klingonese) Evasive!
[Epsilon IX - exterior]

LIEUTENANT: This is comm station Epsilon Nine, calling U.S.S. Columbia. Come in Columbia. Respond!
COLUMBIA VOICE: (too faint to understand)
LIEUTENANT: This is Epsilon Nine. Am boosting output. How do you read this?
COLUMBIA VOICE: All right. (too faint to understand)
LIEUTENANT: Scout Columbia NCC six two one to rendezvous with Scout Revere NCC five nine five on stardate seven four one one point four. Further orders to be relayed at that time. Signed, Commodore Probert, Starfleet. End of transmission.
COLUMBIA VOICE: All right. (too faint to understand)
[Epsilon IX - interior]

LIEUTENANT: Our sensor drone is intercepting this on Quad L fourteen.
BRANCH: That's in Klingon boundaries. Who are they fighting?
LIEUTENANT: Unknown, sir.
TECHNICIAN: I have an exterior visual.
(the battle cruisers are destroyed by energy bolts from the Cloud)
LIEUTENANT: We've plotted a course on that Cloud, Commander. It will pass into Federation space fairly close to us.
BRANCH: Heading?
LIEUTENANT: Sir, it's on a precise heading for Earth!
[Surface of Vulcan]

FEMALE MASTER: (in Vulcan) Our ancestors cast out their animal passions on these very sands, ...saving our race through the attainment of Kolinahr.
MALE MASTER: (in Vulcan) Kolinahr, through which all emotion is renounced and shed.
FEMALE MASTER: (in Vulcan) You have laboured for many seasons, Spock ...and you have proved yourself worthy ...to receive this symbol of pure logic.
(Spock stops her putting the ancient pendant around his neck)
FEMALE MASTER: (in Vulcan) Your thoughts, give them to me. Our minds are joined, Spock, ...together, and as one. I sense the consciousness calling to you from space. ...Your human blood is touched by it, Spock. You have not yet attained Kolinahr. He must search elsewhere for his answer. He shall not find it here. Live long and prosper, Spock.
STARFLEET HEADQUARTERS
STARDATE: 7410.2
[San Francisco Air Tram station]

KIRK: Commander Sonak, you received your appointment as Enterprise science officer?
SONAK: Based, I am told, on your recommendation, Admiral. Thank you.
KIRK: Why aren't you on board?
SONAK: Captain Decker requested I complete final science briefing here before we leave on our mission.
KIRK: Here? At Starfleet? The Enterprise is in final preparation to leave dock.
SONAK: Which will require twenty more hours at minimum.
KIRK: Twelve! I'm on my way to a meeting with Admiral Nogura which will not last more than three minutes. Report to me on the Enterprise in one hour.
SONAK: Report to you, sir?
KIRK: It is my intention to be on that ship following that meeting. Report to me in one hour.
[Orbital Office Complex]

SCOTT: Admiral.
KIRK: Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Those departure orders, twelve hours, Starfleet cannot be serious.
KIRK: Why aren't the Enterprise transporters operating, Mister Scott?
SCOTT: A wee problem, sir, really. Just temporary. Admiral, we have just spent eighteen months redesigning and refitting the Enterprise. How in the name of hell do they expect to have her ready in twelve hours?
KIRK: Take me over, please.
[Travel Pod]

SCOTT: She needs more work, a shakedown.
KIRK: Mister Scott, there's an alien object with unbelievable destructive power less than three days away from this planet. ...The only starship in interception range is the Enterprise. Ready, or not, she launches in twelve hours.
SCOTT: The crew hasn't had near enough transition time with all the new equipment. And the engines are not yet tested at warp power. And an untried Captain.
KIRK: Two and a half years as Chief of Starfleet Operations may have made me a stale but I wouldn't exactly consider myself untried. They gave her back to me, Scotty.
SCOTT: Gave her back, sir? I doubt it was that easy with Nogura.
KIRK: You're right
SCOTT: Well, any man who could manage such a feat, I wouldna dare disappoint. She'll launch on time, sir, ...and she'll be ready.
(Enterprise flyby)
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
[Enterprise cargo deck]

TANNOY VOICE: Cargo bay to launch crew. Travel pod is now available at dock six.
KIRK: Permission to come aboard, sir?
ENSIGN: Granted, sir. Welcome aboard, Admiral. ...Commander Scott, you're needed in engineering immediately.
SCOTT: Sir, you'll excuse me?
TANNOY VOICE: Flight deck. Prepare for incoming shuttlecraft.
ENSIGN: Sir, if you'll follow me, I'll...
KIRK: I think I can find my way, Ensign.
ENSIGN: Aye sir.
[Enterprise turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge.
[Enterprise bridge]

FEMALE CREWMEMBER'S VOICE: What's the problem? I thought you had that circuit patched an hour ago.
MALE CREWMEMBER'S VOICE: We did. And we had to disconnect it.
CREWMEMBER'S VOICES: (general technical chatter)
UHURA: I'll get somebody down there just as soon as I can. ...Captain! Starfleet just signalled your transfer-of-command orders, sir.
SULU: Captain!
KIRK: I appreciate your welcome. I wish the circumstances were less critical. Epsilon Nine is monitoring the intruder. Keep a channel open.
UHURA: Aye sir.
KIRK: Where's Captain Decker?
SULU: He's in engineering, sir. ...He ...doesn't know.
KIRK: Mister Chekov!
CHEKOV: Aye sir.
KIRK: Assemble the crew on the Recreation Deck at oh four hundred hours. I want to show them what we're facing.
SULU: He wanted her back. He got her!
ALIEN ENSIGN: And Captain Decker? He's been with the ship every minute of her refitting.
UHURA: Ensign, the possibilities of our returning from this mission in one piece may have just doubled.
[Enterprise engineering]

VOICES (OC): Check. Cleary on number six.
Space matrix restoration coils. Dilithium crystals.
I knew it. The transporter sensor was not activated.
Faulty modules.
SCOTT (OC): Cleary! Put a new backup sensor into the unit.
CLEARY (OC): Aye sir.
DECKER: Admiral Kirk! ...We're getting a top brass send off? Don't worry, she'll launch on schedule if we have to tow her out with our bare hands. Right, Scotty?
SCOTT: Aye, yes, that we will, sir.
KIRK: Let's talk.
DECKER: Sure. Let me now when the backup's ready.
SCOTT: Aye sir.
DECKER: With all due respect, sir, I hope this isn't some kind of Starfleet pep talk, I'm really too busy.
KIRK: I'm taking over the center seat, Will.
DECKER: You're what?
KIRK: I'm replacing you as Captain of the Enterprise. You'll stay on as Executive Officer. Temporary grade reduction to Commander.
DECKER: You personally, are assuming command?
KIRK: Yeah.
DECKER: May I ask? Why?
KIRK: My experience, five years out there dealing with unknowns like this, my familiarity with the Enterprise, this crew.
DECKER: Admiral, this is an almost totally new Enterprise. You don't know her a tenth as well as I do.
KIRK: That's why you're staying aboard. I'm sorry, 
DECKER: No, Admiral. I don't think you are, not one damn bit. I remember when you recommended me for this command. You told me how envious you were, and how much you hoped you'd find a way to get a starship command again. Well, it looks like you found a way.
KIRK: Report to the bridge, Commander. Immediately.
DECKER: Aye sir.
CLEARY: Transporter room, come in! Urgent! Redline on the transporters, Mister Scott!
SCOTT: Transporter room, do not engage! Do not...
CLEARY: It's too late. They're beaming now!
[Enterprise transporter room]

RAND: Do you read me Starfleet? Override us. Pull them back!
KIRK: Give it to me. Starfleet, boost your matter gain, we need more signal! ...More signal!
SCOTT: We're losing their pattern.
RAND: Oh, no! They're forming!
WOMAN: (a scream)
SONAK: (a moan)
KIRK: Starfleet, do you have them?
STARFLEET VOICE: Enterprise, ...what we got back didn't live long, ...fortunately.
KIRK: Starfleet, ...Kirk. Please ...express my condolences to their families. Commander Sonak's can be reached through the Vulcan Embassy. There was nothing you could have done, Rand. It wasn't your fault.
[Enterprise corridor]

KIRK: Yeoman! Turboshaft eight?
YEOMAN: Back that way, sir.
KIRK: We have to replace Commander Sonak. I'd still like a Vulcan there, if possible.
DECKER: None available, Captain. There's no one available. In fact there's no one who's fully rated on this design.
KIRK: You are, Mister Decker. I'm afraid you're gonna have to double as science officer.
[Enterprise recreation deck]

KIRK: That's all we know about it, except that it's now fifty-three point four hours away from Earth. Enterprise is the only Federation starship that stands in its way. Our orders are to intercept, investigate, and take whatever action is necessary, ...and possible.
BRIDGE VOICE: Bridge to Captain. Priority signal from Epsilon Nine.
KIRK: Put it on the viewer.
UHURA (OC): On viewer, sir.
BRANCH (on viewer): Enterprise, the Cloud is definitely a power field of some kind. Measures, my God, over two A.U.'s in diameter. Must be something incredible inside there generating it. We're transmitting linguacode friendship messages on all frequencies. No response.
TECHNICIAN (on viewer): I have a null reading at the center of the Cloud, sir.
LIEUTENANT (on viewer): Definitely something inside there but all scans are being reflected back.
BRANCH (on viewer): A kind of power surge.
LIEUTENANT (on viewer): Receiving an odd pattern now.
BRANCH (on viewer): Enterprise, ...they could be mistaking our scans as a hostile act.
LIEUTENANT (on viewer): They seem to be reacting to our scans, sir.
BRANCH (on viewer): Deflectors, emergency full! We are under attack!
KIRK: External view!
(Epsilon IX is destroyed in the same way as the Klingon battle cruisers)
KIRK: Viewer off. ...Pre-launch countdown will commence in forty minutes.
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA (OC): Transporter system fully repaired and functioning normally, sir.
SULU: Dock signals clear, Captain.
KIRK: Reply we are holding position awaiting final crew replacements.
UHURA: Aye sir. Transporter personnel reports the Navigator Lieutenant ...Ilia. She's already aboard, and en route to the bridge, sir. She's Deltan, sir.
ILIA: Lieutenant Ilia reporting for duty, sir.
KIRK: Welcome aboard, Lieutenant.
DECKER: Hello, Ilia.
ILIA: Decker!
DECKER: I was stationed on the Lieutenant's home planet some years ago.
ILIA: 'Commander' Decker?
KIRK: Yes, our Exec and science officer.
DECKER: Captain Kirk has the utmost confidence in me.
KIRK: And in you too, Lieutenant.
ILIA: My oath of celibacy is on record Captain. May I assume my duties?
KIRK: By all means.
UHURA: Captain, Starfleet reports our last six crewmembers are ready to beam up, ...but one of them is refusing to step into the transporter.
KIRK: Oh? I'll see that he beams up! ...Transporter room.
[Enterprise transporter room]

KIRK: Ellen.
ELLEN: Yes sir.
KIRK: What was the problem down there?
ELLEN: He insisted we go first, sir. Said something about first seeing how it scrambled our molecules.
KIRK: That has a familiar ring, doesn't it? Starfleet, this is Captain Kirk. Beam that officer up now! ...Well, for a man who swore he'd never return to Starfleet.
McCOY: Just a moment, Captain, sir. I'll explain what happened. Your revered Admiral Nogura invoked a little known, and seldom used, reserve activation clause, ...in simpler language, Captain, they drafted me!
KIRK: They didn't!
McCOY: This was your idea! This was your idea, wasn't it?
KIRK: Bones, there's a 'thing' out there...
McCOY: Why is any object we don't understand always called a 'thing'?
KIRK: ...headed this way. I need you. Dammit Bones, I need you. Badly!
McCOY: Permission to come aboard?
RAND (OC): Permission granted, sir.
McCOY: Well, Jim, I hear Chapel's an MD now. Well, I'm gonna need a top nurse, not a doctor who'll argue every little diagnosis with me. And ...they've probably redesigned the whole sickbay, too. I know engineers. They love to change things.
(the Enterprise in Spacedock)
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Dock control reports ready, sir.
SULU: Helm ready, sir.
ILIA: Orbital departure on plot, sir.
UHURA: Yard command signalling clear, sir.
KIRK: Maneuvering thrusters, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Maneuvering thrusters, sir.
KIRK: Hold station.
SULU: Thrusters at station keeping.
KIRK: Thrusters ahead, Mister Sulu. ...Take us out.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Intermix set. Bridge, impulse power at your discretion.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Impulse power, Mister Sulu. Ahead, warp point five. ...Departure angle on viewer.
SULU: Departure angle.
KIRK: Viewer ahead.
(external space, Enterprise passes Jupiter)
Captain's log, stardate 7412.6. one point eight hours from launch. In order to intercept the intruder at the earliest possible time, we must now risk engaging warp drive while still within the solar system.
DECKER: Captain, assuming we have full warp capability, accelerating to warp seven on leaving the solar system will bring us to IP with the intruder, twenty point one hours.
KIRK: Well, Bones, do the new medical facilities meet with your approval?
McCOY: They do not. It's like working in a damned computer center.
KIRK: Programming ready?
DECKER: Programme set for standard warp entry, Captain, ...but I still recommend further simulation study.
KIRK: Mister Decker, every minute brings that object closer to Earth! Engineering! Stand by for warp drive.
SCOTT (on intercom): We need further warp simulation on the flow sensors.
KIRK: Engineer, we need warp speed now!
McCOY: Jim, you're pushing. Your people know their jobs.
[Enterprise engineering]

ASSISTANT ENGINEER: That's it, sir. I can't do any better.
SCOTT: Aye, lad. It's borderline on the simulator. Captain, I canna guarantee that she'll hold up.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Warp drive, Mister Scott. Ahead, warp one, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Accelerating to warp one, sir. Warp point seven, ...point eight, ...warp one, sir.
KIRK: Mister Decker... Wormhole! ...Get us back on impulse power! Full reverse!
SULU: Negative helm control, Captain! Going reverse on impulse power!
UHURA: Subspace frequencies are jammed, sir. Wormhole effect!
DECKER: Negative control from inertial lag will continue twenty-two point five seconds before forward velocity slows to sub-light speed.
ILIA: Unidentified small object has been pulled into the wormhole with us, Captain! Directly ahead!
KIRK: Forcefields up, full! Put object on viewer. ...Manual override on helm.
SULU: No manual response!
ILIA: Navigational deflectors coming up.
DECKER: Wormhole distortion has over-loaded main power systems!
ILIA: Navigational deflectors inoperative, Captain. Directional control also inoperative.
KIRK: (slowly, distorted) Time to impact?
ILIA: (slowly, distorted) Twenty seconds.
KIRK: (slowly, distorted) Mister Chekov, stand by on phasers.
DECKER: (slowly, distorted) No! ...Belay that phaser order! ...Arm photon torpedoes.
CHEKOV: (slowly, distorted) Photon torpedoes ...armed.
ILIA: (slowly, distorted) Object is an asteroid, reading mass point seven.
CHEKOV: (slowly, distorted) Targeting asteroid.
ILIA: (slowly, distorted) Impact in ten seconds. ...Impact in eight seconds
DECKER: (slowly, distorted) Fire torpedoes!
ILIA: (slowly, distorted) ...Six.
CHEKOV: (slowly, distorted) Torpedoes away.
ILIA: (slowly, distorted) ...Four.
SULU: Helm control restored, sir.
DECKER: Position report, Navigator?
ILIA: Computing new interception course.
UHURA (OC): Communications are normal, sir.
CHEKOV (OC): Negative damage report, Captain. No casualties reported, Doctor.
McCOY: Wrong, Mister Chekov, there are casualties. My wits! As in 'frightened-out-of', Captain, sir!
DECKER: We're at warp point eight. Engineer, ...report your status there.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: In just a second, Exec, we're picking up the pieces down here.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Mister Scott, we need warp drive as soon as possible.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, it was the engine imbalance that created the wormhole in the first place. ...It'll happen again if we don't correct it.
[Enterprise bridge]

DECKER: We must correct it.
KIRK: That object out there is less than two days from Earth. We need to intercept while it still is out there. Navigator lay in a new heading to conform with our initial IP. Mister Sulu, you have the conn.
KIRK: Mister Decker, I'd like to see you in my quarters.
McCOY: Mind if I tag along, Captain?
KIRK: Level five.
[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: All right, explanation? Why was my phaser order countermanded?
DECKER: Sir, the Enterprise redesign increases phaser power by channelling it through the main engines. When they went into anti-matter imbalance, the phasers were automatically cut off.
KIRK: Then you acted properly, of course.
DECKER: Thank you, sir. ...I'm sorry if I embarrassed you.
KIRK: You saved the ship.
DECKER: I'm aware of that, sir.
KIRK: Stop ...competing with me, Decker!
DECKER: Permission to speak freely, sir?
KIRK: Granted.
DECKER: Sir, you haven't logged a single star hour in two and a half years. That, plus your unfamiliarity with the ship's redesign, in my opinion, sir, seriously jeopardises this mission.
KIRK: I trust you will ...nursemaid me through these difficulties, Mister?
DECKER: Yes sir. I'll do that.
KIRK: Then I won't keep you from your duties any longer, Commander.
KIRK: Yes, Doctor?
DECKER: Aye sir.
McCOY: He may be right, Jim.
[Enterprise corridor]

ILIA: Was it difficult?
DECKER: No more than I expected. ...Not as difficult as seeing you. I'm sorry.
ILIA: That you left Delta Four? Or that you didn't even say 'goodbye'?
DECKER: If I had seen you again, ...would you have been able to say it?
ILIA: No.
[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Make your point, Doctor.
McCOY: The point, Captain, is that it's you who's competing. ...You rammed getting this command down Starfleet's throat. You've used this emergency to get Enterprise back.
KIRK: And I intend to keep her, is it that what you're saying?
McCOY: Yes! It's an obsession, an obsession that can blind you to far more immediate, and critical responsibilities. Your reaction to Decker is an example.
UHURA (on intercom): Bridge to Captain.
KIRK: Viewer on.
UHURA (on intercom): Signal from a Federation-registered long-range shuttle, sir.
UHURA (on viewer): She wishes to come alongside, and lock on.
KIRK: For what purpose?
CHEKOV (on viewer):Our security scanning shows it has a Grade-One priority, Captain. Non-belligerency confirmed. I suspect it is a ...courier of some kind.
KIRK: Very well, Mister Chekov, see to it. Viewer off. Your ...opinion has been noted.
McCOY: Is there anything further?
KIRK (OC): That depends on you.
[Shuttle dock entrance]

COMPUTER VOICE: Security scan. One border. Identity, Starfleet inactive.
SPOCK: Permission to come aboard, sir?
CHEKOV: Granted, sir! Granted!
[Enterprise bridge]

CREW: Why... Why ...it's Mister...
KIRK: Spock! ...Spock.
SPOCK: Commander, if I may?
DECKER: If... Oh!
SPOCK: I have been monitoring your communications with Starfleet Command, Captain, I'm aware of your engine design difficulties. ...I offer my services as science officer. ...With all due respect, Commander.
KIRK: If our Exec has no objections?
DECKER: Of course not. I'm well aware of Mister Spock's qualifications.
KIRK: Mister Chekov, log Mister Spock's Starfleet commission reactivated, list him as science officer, ...both effective immediately.
CHAPEL: Mister Spock!!!
McCOY: Well, so help me, I'm actually pleased to see you.
UHURA: It's how we all feel, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Captain, with your permission, I will now discuss these fuel equations with the Engineer.
KIRK: Mister Spock, welcome aboard.
Captain's log, stardate 7413.4. Thanks to Mister Spock's timely arrival, and assistance, we have the engines rebalanced into full warp capacity. Repair time less than three hours, ...which means we will now be able to intercept intruder while still more than a day from Earth.
SULU: Warp point eight, ...point nine, ...warp two, ...warp five, ...warp six, ...warp seven, sir.
[Enterprise officers lounge]

SPOCK: Science officer Spock, reporting as ordered, Captain.
KIRK: Please sit down.
McCOY: Spock, you haven't changed a bit. You're just as warm and sociable as ever.
SPOCK: Nor have you, Doctor, as your continued predilection for irrelevancy demonstrates.
KIRK: Gentlemen. At last report you were on Vulcan. Apparently to stay.
McCOY: Yes, you were undergoing the Kolineer discipline.
KIRK: Sit down.
SPOCK: If you are referring to the Kolinahr, Doctor, you are correct.
McCOY: Well, however it's pronounced, Mister Spock, it's the Vulcan ritual supposed to purge all remaining emotions.
KIRK: The Kolinahr is also the discipline you broke ...to join us. Will you, please, ...sit down!
SPOCK: On Vulcan I began sensing a consciousness of a force more powerful than I have ever encountered. Thought patterns of exactingly perfect order. I believe they emanate from the intruder. I believe it may hold my answers.
McCOY: Well, isn't it lucky for you that we just happened to be heading your way?
KIRK: Bones! We need him. I need him.
SPOCK: Then my presence is to our mutual advantage.
KIRK: Any thought patterns you might sense, ...whether they appear to affect you personally or not, I expect to be immediately reported.
SPOCK: Of course, Captain. Is there anything else?
KIRK: No.
McCOY: Jim, ...if this super-intelligence is as important to him as he says, how do we know?
KIRK: That he wouldn't put his interests ahead of the ship's. I could never believe that.
McCOY: How do we know about any of us?
UHURA (on intercom): Bridge to Officer's lounge, Captain Kirk. Revised estimate on Cloud visual contact, three point seven minutes.
KIRK: On my way.
[Enterprise bridge]

(klaxon sounding RED ALERT)
KIRK: Give us a reading, Commander. ...Standard light, Engineer. Full mag on viewer.
SULU: Full mag, sir.
KIRK: Linguacode?
UHURA: Continuing friendship messages on all frequencies.
CHEKOV: All decks and divisions confirm, status red.
SPOCK: Captain, we are being scanned.
KIRK: Do not return scan, Mister Spock. It could be misinterpreted as hostility.
SPOCK: Intruder scans emanate from the exact center of the Cloud. Energy of a type ...never before encountered.
UHURA: No response to friendship messages, Captain.
CHEKOV: Should I go to battle stations, sir?
KIRK: Negative, We'll take no provocative action.
DECKER: Recommend defensive posture, screens and shields.
KIRK: No, Mister Decker, ...that could also be misinterpreted as hostile. Cloud composition, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Twelfth-power energy field.
SULU: Twelfth-power?
DECKER: Captain, we've seen what their weapons can do. Shouldn't we take every possible precaution?
KIRK: Mister Decker.
SPOCK: Captain, I suspect there's an object at the heart of that Cloud.
KIRK: Mister Decker, I will not provoke an attack, If that order isn't clear enough for you...
DECKER: Captain, as your Exec, it's my duty to point out alternatives.
KIRK: I stand corrected.
ILIA: Five minutes to Cloud boundary.
KIRK: Navigator, lay in a conic section flight path into the Cloud center. Bring us parallel to whatever we find in there. ...Mister Sulu, tactical plot on viewer.
SULU: Tactical on viewer.
DECKER: That measures twelfth power energy? Thousands of starships couldn't generate that much.
KIRK: Spock... Spock, tell me.
SPOCK: I sense ...puzzlement. We have been contacted. Why have we not replied?
KIRK: Contacted? How?
(klaxon sounds again)
KIRK: Forcefields up. ...Deflectors now!
CHEKOV: Forcefields and deflectors up full, Captain.
KIRK: Analysis, Mister Spock
SPOCK: Alien weapon is a form of plasma energy, Captain. Exact composition unknown. Guidance system unknown.
KIRK: All decks brace for impact.
(an energy bolt hits the Enterprise)
KIRK: Engineering, status report.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Systems overloading, Captain.
[Bridge}

(the effect of the energy bolt hits Chekov's right hand through his console)
CHEKOV: Aaaaarhh. ...Aaaaarhh.
KIRK: Medic.
DECKER: Medics are coming.
SCOTT (on intercom): Engineering to bridge.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: We cannot hold full power on forcefields. Deflector power is down seventy percent!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Divert auxiliary systems power to deflectors.
UHURA: Oh good, Christine. It's Chekov.
CHAPEL: Medic.
ILIA (OC): I can stop his pain.
CHEKOV: Thank you.
SPOCK: Captain, the intruder has been attempting to communicate. ...Frequency more than one million megahertz, and at such high rate of speed their entire message lasts only a millisecond.
SPOCK: I am now programming our computer to transmit linguacode at their frequency and rate of speed. ...Commander
KIRK: Spock!
SULU (OC): Here it comes!
KIRK: Engineering, ...what's happening to our forcefields?
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Our shields cannot handle another attack!
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock? ...Spock!
ILIA (OC): Fifteen seconds,...
KIRK: Spock! Transmit now!
ILIA (OC): ...ten seconds.
DECKER: Transmitting.
KIRK: It would seem that our friendship messages have been received and understood, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: I would say that was a logical assumption, Captain
ILIA: One minute, thirty seconds to Cloud boundary.
SPOCK: Captain, we are obviously confronted by a highly advanced mentality, ...yet they cannot understand who we are, or what we want.
KIRK: And yet it would seem that they understand our messages. They broke off the attack.
DECKER: They may have attacked only as a warning to us, Captain, to keep away.
SPOCK: That would presuppose a feeling, Commander, ...compassion. I sensed no emotion, only ...pure logic.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, hold present position.
SULU: Holding present position, sir.
KIRK: Tactical plot on viewer.
SULU (OC): Course projection on tactical, sir.
KIRK: Opinion, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Recommend we proceed, Captain.
KIRK: Mister Decker?
DECKER: I advise caution, Captain, we can't withstand another attack.
KIRK: That thing is twenty hours away from Earth. We know nothing about it yet.
DECKER: That's precisely the point. We don't know it will do. Moving into that Cloud, at this time, is an unwarranted gamble.
KIRK: How do you define 'unwarranted'?
DECKER: You asked my opinion, sir.
KIRK: Viewer, standard ahead. ...Navigator, maintain course. Helmsman, ...steady as she goes.
(the crew watch on the viewer as the Enterprise flies into the Cloud)
KIRK: No vessel could generate a power field of this magnitude. ...Spock?
SPOCK: Instruments fluctuating, Captain. Patterns unrecognisable.
(the Enterprise continues to fly into the Cloud)
KIRK: Transmit image of the alien to Starfleet, advise we are attempting further to communicate.
UHURA: Unable to make contact with Starfleet, Captain. Any attempt to transmit out of the Cloud is being reflected back.
SULU: We're closing in on it rapidly, Captain.
KIRK: Reduce magnification. Factor four, Mister Sulu.
SULU: We're already two settings below that, sir.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, ...bring us into a parallel course, over the alien at five hundred metres distance.
SULU: Five hundred metres?
KIRK: Then take us out to one hundred kilometres, adjusting parallel course.
SULU: Aye sir.
KIRK (OC): Viewer astern.
SULU (OC): Reverse angle on viewer.
SULU: Five hundred metres.
KIRK: Viewer ahead.
SULU (OC): Viewer ahead, sir.
(Enterprise continues flying even deeper into the Cloud)
KIRK: Hold relative position here.
(klaxon sounds alert for incoming alien weapon)
CHEKOV: Mister Spock? Can that be one of their crew?
SPOCK: A probe from their vessel, Captain. Plasma-energy combination.
DECKER: Don't interfere with it!
CHEKOV: Absolutely I will not interfere.
KIRK: No one interfere. It doesn't seem interested in us, only the ship. ...Computer off.
DECKER: Its taken control of the computer!
KIRK: It's running our records. Earth defences, ...Starfleet strength, 
(Spock smashes the computer console controls)
DECKER: Ilia! ...Ilia!
(the probe with Ilia disappears)
DECKER: This is how I define unwarranted! ...Activate auxiliary computer circuits through manual shut-off.
(klaxon sounds again)
SPOCK (OC): Captain, we have been seized by a tractor beam.
KIRK (OC) Get someone up here to take the Navigator's station! Engineering, ...full emergency power!
DECKER: Chief Difalco to the bridge, on the double!
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, if we don't break free in fifteen seconds, she'll burn up.
[Enterprise bridge]

SPOCK: We cannot break free, Captain. We only have a fraction of the power necessary.
KIRK: Engineering! Belay that order, Scotty! Disengage all main drive systems!
DECKER: Chief Difalco, take over Lieutenant Ilia's station.
(the Enterprise is pulled towards an 'iris' aperture)
KIRK: Difalco, disengage engine navigation relays now.
DIFALCO (OC): Aye sir.
ENGINEERING TECHNICIAN: Forcefield circuits E ten through E fourteen show ready for reactivation. Confirm, please.
KIRK (OC): Scotty, drive systems should be free now.
DECKER: Commander?
UHURA: Ready to launch remote drone with complete ship's record including our present situation, sir.
DECKER: Delay launching as long as possible. Our drone can't escape as long as we're held in their traction.
UHURA: Aye.
DECKER: Captain, a maximum phaser strike directly at the beam might weaken it just enough for us to break free.
SPOCK: Break free to where, Commander? Any show of resistance would be futile, Captain.
DECKER: We don't know that, Mister Spock. Why are you opposed to trying?
(the Enterprise's journey inside the alien ship continues)
DECKER: Why bring us inside? Not to destroy us, they could have done that outside.
KIRK: They still can.
SPOCK: Curiosity, Mister Decker, ...insatiable curiosity.
UHURA: Captain, photic-sonar readings indicate the aperture is closing. We're trapped, sir!
SULU (OC): Reverse angle on the viewer, Captain.
SPOCK: The tractor beam has released us, Captain.
DIFALCO: Confirmed. Vessel is floating free. No forward momentum.
KIRK: Viewer ahead.
SULU: Viewer ahead, sir.
KIRK: Maneuvering thrusters, Mister Sulu, ahead, one third.
SULU (OC): Thrusters ahead one third.
KIRK: Let's take a look. Full sensor scan, Mister Spock. They can't expect us not to look them over now.
DECKER: Now that we're looking down their throat.
KIRK: Right! Now that they've got us just where they want us.
SULU (OC): It's closing up.
KIRK: Hold position.
SPOCK: Captain, ...all our scans are being reflected back. Sensors are useless.
KIRK: Damn! ...What do you make of all this?
SPOCK: I believe the closed orifice leads to another chamber. Undoubtedly part of the vessel's inner mechanism. I suspect it may be necessary...
COMPUTER VOICE: Intruder Alert! Intruder Alert!
CHEKOV: Deck five, Captain, Officers' Quarters!
KIRK: Have a security team meet me at deck five main elevator. Spock! Mister Decker you have the conn. Hold position.
[Ilia's quarters]

(the Ilia probe is in the sonic shower)
ILIA PROBE: You are the Kirk unit. You will assist me. I've been programmed by V'Ger to observe and record normal functioning of the carbon-based units infesting U.S.S. Enterprise.
McCOY: Jim, what's going on?
KIRK: Tricorder. ...Who is ...'V'Ger'?
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger is that which has programmed me.
KIRK: Is V'Ger the name of the captain of the alien vessel?
McCOY: Jim, this is a mechanism!
SPOCK: A probe, Captain. No doubt a sensor-transceiver combination, recording everything we say and do.
KIRK: Where is Lieutenant Ilia?
ILIA PROBE: That unit no longer functions. I have been given its form to more readily communicate with the carbon-based units infesting Enterprise.
SECURITY GUARD: 'Carbon-based units'?
McCOY: Humans, Ensign Perez. Us.
KIRK: Why does V'Ger travel to the third planet of the solar system directly ahead?
ILIA PROBE: To find the Creator.
KIRK: To find the Creator? Whose? ...What does V'Ger want with the Creator?
ILIA PROBE: To join with him.
SPOCK: Join with the Creator? ...How?
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger and the Creator will become one.
SPOCK: And who is the Creator?
ILIA PROBE: The Creator is that which created V'Ger.
KIRK: Who is V'Ger?
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger is that which seeks the Creator. I am ready to commence my observations.
SPOCK: Doctor, a thorough examination of this probe might provide some insight into those who manufactured it, and how to deal with them.
McCOY: Fine! Let's get her to sickbay.
ILIA PROBE: I am programmed to observe and record only the normal functioning procedures of the carbon-based units.
KIRK: The ...examination is a normal function.
ILIA PROBE: You may proceed.
[Enterprise examining room]

McCOY: ...micro-miniature hydraulics, sensors, and molecule-sized multi-processor chips. ...And take a look at this!
CHAPEL: Osmotic micro-pump, ...right here. Even the smallest body functions are exactly duplicated. ...And every exocrine system is here, too, ...even eye moisture.
ILIA PROBE Deck ...er.
SPOCK: Fascinating. Not 'Decker-unit'? ...Gentlemen.
KIRK: Will.
[Enterprise corridor]

DECKER: What happened to her?
SPOCK: Captain, ...this probe may be a key a key to the aliens.
DECKER: Probe? Ilia?
SPOCK: Exactly. It's a programmed mechanism, Commander. ...Its body duplicates our navigator in precise detail. Suppose that beneath it's programming, the real Ilia's memory patterns are duplicated with equal precision.
KIRK: They had a pattern to follow.
SPOCK: Indeed. ...They may have followed it too precisely.
KIRK: Ilia's memory, her feelings of loyalty, obedience, friendship, ...might all be there.
SPOCK: You did have a 'relationship' with Lieutenant Ilia, Commander.
DECKER: That probe in there, in a different form now, is what killed Ilia!
KIRK: Commander! Will, we're locked in an alien vessel, six hours from Earth orbit, our only contact with our captor is that probe. If we could control it, persuade it, use it in some way.
(the Ilia probe breaks out into the corridor)
ILIA PROBE: I have recorded enough here. You will now assist me further.
KIRK: The Decker-unit can assist you with much greater efficiency. ...Carry on with your assignment, Mister Decker.
DECKER: Aye sir.
SPOCK: I am concerned with that being our only source of information.
Captain's log, stardate 7414.1. Our best estimates place us some four hours from Earth. No significant progress thus far reviving Ilia memory patterns within the alien probe. This remains our only means of contact with our captor.

[Kirk's quarters]

DECKER (on viewscreen): All these vessels were called 'Enterprise'.
[Enterprise recreation deck]

DECKER: The carbon units use this area for recreation. ...This is one of the games. ...What type of recreation does the crew aboard your vessel enjoy?
ILIA PROBE: The words 'recreation' and 'enjoy' have no meaning to my programming.
DECKER: Ilia enjoyed this game, ...she nearly always won.
[Kirk's quarters]

McCOY: Good! He's using audial-visual association.
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): This device serves no purpose. ...Why does Enterprise require the presence of carbon units?
DECKER (on viewscreen): Enterprise would be unable to function without carbon units.
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): More data concerning this functioning is necessary before carbon units can be patterned for data storage.
DECKER (on viewscreen): What does that mean?
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): When my examination is complete, all carbon units will be reduced to data patterns.
DECKER (on viewscreen): Within you, are memory patterns of a certain carbon unit. If I can help you revive those patterns, you could understand our functions better.
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): That is logical. You may proceed.
[Enterprise airlock area]

(Spock disables a technician with a nerve pinch)
[Kirk's quarters]

(viewscreen has moved to Ilia's quarters)
CHAPEL (on viewscreen): I remember Lieutenant Ilia once mentioning that she wore this.
DECKER (on viewscreen): Put it on. ...On Delta, ...remember?
CHAPEL (on viewscreen): Ilia.
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): Doctor Chapel, ...Will?
DECKER (on viewscreen): Ilia.
McCOY (on viewscreen): Commander. ...Commander, ...this is a mechanism.
DECKER (on viewscreen): Ilia, help us make direct contact with V'Ger.
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): I cannot.
DECKER (on viewscreen): This Creator V'Ger's looking for. What is it?
ILIA PROBE (on viewscreen): V'Ger does not know.
[Outside Enterprise - Spock in a thruster suit]

SPOCK: Computer. Commence recording. Captain Kirk, these messages will detail my attempt to contact the aliens. ...I intend to calculate thruster ignition and acceleration rates to coincide with the opening of the V'Ger orifice. This should facilitate a better view of the interior of the alien spacecraft.
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: Captain, Starfleet signals growing in strength, sir. ...They still have the intruder on their monitors. It's decelerating!
SULU: Confirmed. Lunar beacons indicate intruder on a course into Earth orbit.
CHEKOV: Sir! Airlock four has been opened. A thruster suit is reported missing!
KIRK: A thruster suit? That's Spock! Damn him! Bring him back here. ...No wait, ...get a fix on his position.
CHEKOV: Aye sir.
[Outside Enterprise]

(Spock fires the thruster suit and successfully passes through the opening orifice)
SPOCK: I have successfully penetrated the next chamber of the alien's Interior, and I am witnessing some sort of dimensional image which I believe to be a representation of V'Ger's home planet. I am passing through a connecting tunnel. Apparently a kind of plasma-energy conduit. Possibly a field coil for gigantic imaging systems. Curious. I am seeing images of planets, moons, stars, whole galaxies all stored in here, recorded. It could be a record of V'Ger's entire journey. But who, or what, are we dealing with? The Epsilon Nine station, stored here with every detail. Captain, I am now quite convinced that all of this is V'Ger. That we are inside a living machine. Ilia. The sensor ...must contain some special meaning. I must try to mind-meld with it. Aaaaarhh.
(Spock reappears outside the Enterprise, Kirk in a spacesuit retrieves him)
KIRK: Spock? ...Spock?
[Enterprise sickbay]

CHAPEL: Now scanning pons area. Spinal nerve fiber connection.
McCOY: Indications of some neurological trauma. The power pouring through that mind-meld must have been staggering.
SPOCK: Jim, ...I should have known.
KIRK: Were you right? About V'Ger?
SPOCK: A lifeform of its own, a conscious, living entity.
CHAPEL (OC): A living machine?
KIRK: It considers the Enterprise a living machine. That's why the probe refers it as an entity.
SPOCK: I saw V'Ger's planet, a planet populated by living machines. Unbelievable technology. V'Ger has knowledge that spans this universe. And, yet with all this pure logic, ...V'Ger is barren, cold, no mystery, no beauty. I should have known.
KIRK: Known? Known what? ...Spock, what should you have known?
SPOCK: This simple feeling ...is beyond V'Ger's comprehension. No meaning, ...no hope, ...and, Jim, no answers. It's asking questions. 'Is this ...all I am? Is there nothing more?'
UHURA (on intercom): Bridge to Captain.
KIRK: Kirk here.
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: A faint signal from Starfleet, sir. Intruder Cloud has been located on their outer monitors for past twenty-seven minutes. ...Cloud dissipating rapidly as it approaches.
SULU: Starfleet reports forward velocity has slowed to sub-warp speed. We are three minutes from Earth's orbit.
[Enterprise sickbay]

KIRK: I'll be right there. ...I need Spock on the bridge.
CHAPEL: Dalaphaline, five cc's.
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA (OC): Captain, Starfleet is sending this tactical on V'Ger's position. V'Ger is transmitting a signal.
DECKER: Jim!
KIRK: From V'Ger?
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger signals the Creator.
KIRK: Spock?
SPOCK: A simple binary code transmitted by carrier-wave signal. Radio.
KIRK: Radio?
DECKER: Jim, V'Ger expects an answer.
KIRK: An answer? I don't know the question.
ILIA PROBE: The Creator has not responded.
CHEKOV: All planetary defence systems have just gone inoperative.
UHURA: Sir, Starfleet says the devices are proceeding to equidistant positions orbiting the planet.
McCOY: They're the same things that hit us.
SPOCK: They are hundreds of times more powerful, Captain. From those positions they could devastate the entire surface of the planet.
KIRK: Why?
ILIA PROBE: The Creator has not answered. The carbon-units infestation is to be removed from the Creator's planet.
KIRK: Why?
ILIA PROBE: You infest, Enterprise. You interfere with the Creator in the same manner.
KIRK: The carbon-units are not an infestation. They are ...a natural function of the Creator's planet. They are living things.
ILIA PROBE: They are not true lifeforms Only the Creator and other similar lifeforms are true.
McCOY: Similar lifeforms. Jim, V'Ger is saying its Creator is a machine.
KIRK: Machine!
SPOCK: Captain, V'Ger is a child. I suggest you treat it as such.
KIRK: A child?
SPOCK: Yes, captain, a child. Evolving, learning, searching, instinctively needing.
DECKER: Needing what?
McCOY: Spock! This thing is about to wipe out every living thing on Earth Now what do you suggest we do? Spank it?
SPOCK: It only knows that it needs, Commander. But like so many of us, it does not know what.
KIRK: The carbon units know why the Creator has not responded.
ILIA PROBE: Disclose the information.
KIRK: Not until V'Ger withdraws the devices orbiting the third planet.
UHURA: Captain! I'm losing Starfleet. Interference from V'Ger.
ILIA PROBE: Kirk unit, disclose the information. Why has the Creator not responded?
KIRK: No. ...Secure all stations, clear the bridge.
(the Enterprise suffers a severe shock)
SULU: Clear the bridge, Captain?
KIRK: That was the order, Mister Sulu. Clear the bridge.
SULU: Aye sir.
(the Enterprise is rocked by more severe shocks)
McCOY: Your child is having a tantrum, Mister Spock.
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger requires the information.
KIRK: Bridge. Secure all stations. Move out!
McCOY: Jim! What the hell kind of strategy is this?
DECKER: All ship's functions going to automatic, Captain.
KIRK: If V'Ger destroys the Enterprise, all the information that V'Ger requires will also be destroyed.
ILIA PROBE: It is illogical to withhold the required information. ...Kirk unit. Kirk unit, why do you not disclose the information?
KIRK: If V'Ger's gonna to destroy all the carbon units on the third planet...
ILIA PROBE: They have repressed the Creator.
KIRK: ...the information will not be disclosed.
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger needs the information.
KIRK: Then V'Ger must withdraw all the orbiting devices.
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger will comply if the carbon units will disclose the information.
McCOY: It learns fast, doesn't it?
SPOCK: Captain, the vessel, V'Ger, obviously operates from a central brain complex.
KIRK: The orbiting devices will be controlled from that point.
SPOCK: Precisely.
KIRK: The carbon unit's information cannot be disclosed to V'Ger's probe, but only to V'Ger directly.
DECKER: Forward motion, Captain!
SPOCK: Tractor beam.
DECKER: Captain, what's the next move?
KIRK: The question is, Mister Decker, is there a next move? ...Resume duty stations.
DECKER: All personnel resume stations.
KIRK: Well, Mister Decker, it seems my bluff has been called.
DECKER: I'm afraid our hand is pretty weak, Captain.
KIRK: Mister Chekov, when do those devices reach final position?
CHEKOV: Twenty-seven minutes. Mark.
KIRK: Engineering.
SCOTT (on intercom): Scott here.
KIRK: Mister Scott, be prepared to execute Starfleet order two zero zero five.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: When, sir?
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK: On my command.
[Enterprise engineering]

SCOTT: Aye sir.
ROSS: Why has the Captain ordered self-destruct, sir?
SCOTT: I would say, lass, because he thinks, he hopes, that when we go up ...we'll take the intruder with us.
ROSS: Will we?
SCOTT: When that much matter and anti-matter are brought together, oh yes, we will, indeed.
[Enterprise bridge]

CHEKOV: Eighteen minutes to device activation.
DECKER (OC): Give me an all-decks read-out.
UHURA: Starfleet has been apprised of our situation, Captain.
COMPUTER VOICE: Crew status is one seven two at duty stations, two four eight off duty, eleven in sickbay, all minor, Over.
SULU: Tractor beam remains constant.
DIFALCO: We are seventeen kilometres inside the vessel.
DECKER: Engineering, show me your readings.
SCOTT (on intercom): Deck four, that temperature should read one zero one three degrees.
DECKER (OC): Please confirm.
KIRK: Spock. ...Spock?
(as Spock turns Kirk and McCoy see that he is crying)
KIRK: Not for us?
SPOCK: No, Captain, not for us, ...for V'Ger. ...I weep for V'Ger, as I would for a brother. As I was when I came aboard, so is V'Ger now, empty, incomplete, ...searching. Logic and knowledge are not enough.
McCOY: Spock, are you saying that you've found, what you needed, but V'Ger hasn't?
DECKER: What would V'Ger need to fulfil itself?
SPOCK: Each of us, at some time in our life, turns to someone, a father, a brother, a god and asks 'Why am I here?' 'What was I meant to be?' V'Ger hopes to touch its Creator to find its answers.
KIRK: 'Is this all that I am? Is there nothing more?'
DIFALCO: Captain!
SULU: Forward motion slowing, Captain.
SPOCK: Captain, I believe that is our destination.
CHEKOV: I read an oxygen gravity envelope forming outside the Enterprise!
SULU: Forward motion stopped.
ILIA PROBE: V'Ger.
UHURA: Sir, I have located the source of V'Ger's radio signal, it's directly ahead.
SPOCK: That transmitter is a vital link between V'Ger and it's Creator.
ILIA PROBE: The carbon units will now provide V'Ger the required information.
KIRK: Spock, Bones. Mister Decker. ...I will contact you every five minutes.
DECKER: Captain, ...I'd like to go along.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, you have the conn.
[Outside Enterprise - with a 'Giant's Causeway' leading away]

ILIA PROBE: V'Ger!
[Voyager VI platform]

KIRK: V-G-E-R ...V-O-Y-A-G-E-R ...Voyager! ...Voyager VI?
DECKER: NASA. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Jim, this was launched more than three hundred years ago.
KIRK: Voyager series, designed to collect data and transmit it back to Earth.
DECKER: Voyager VI ...disappeared into what they used to call a black hole.
KIRK: It must have emerged sometime on the far side of the Galaxy and fell into the machine's planet's gravitational field.
SPOCK: The machine inhabiters found it to be one of their own kind, primitive yet kindred. They discovered its simple twentieth-century programming. Collect all data possible.
DECKER: Learn all that is learnable. Return that information to its Creator.
SPOCK (OC): Precisely, Mister Decker, the machines interpreted it literally.
SPOCK: They built this entire vessel so that Voyager could fulfil it's programming.
KIRK: And on its journey back it amassed so much knowledge, it achieved consciousness itself. It became a living thing.
ALIEN MACHINE VOICE (OC): (unintelligible)
ILIA PROBE: Kirk unit, V'Ger awaits the information.
KIRK: Enterprise, order up the ship's computer library of records, on the late twentieth-century NASA probe, Voyager VI.
[Enterprise bridge]

KIRK (on intercom): We want the old NASA code signal that instructs the probe to transmit its death.

[Voyager VI platform]

KIRK: ...and fast, Uhura, fast!
UHURA (on intercom): Aye sir.
DECKER: That's what it's been signalling, its readiness to transmit its information.
KIRK: And there's no one on Earth who could recognise the old signal and send a response.
McCOY: The Creator does not answer.
KIRK: V'Ger, ...V'Ger, ...V'Ger, ...we are the Creator.
ILIA PROBE: That is not possible. Carbon units are not true lifeforms.
KIRK (OC): We will prove it. We will make it possible for you to complete your programming. Only the Creator could accomplish that. ...Enterprise?
[Enterprise bridge]

UHURA: We have just received the response code, Captain.

[Voyager VI platform]

KIRK: Set the Enterprise transmitter on appropriate frequency, and transmit the code now.
UHURA (on intercom): Transmitting.
DECKER: Five zero four, three two nine, three one seven, five one zero, and the final sequence...
KIRK: That should trigger Voyager's transmitter.
SPOCK: Voyager is not transmitting its data, Captain.
ILIA PROBE: The Creator must join with V'Ger.
KIRK: Uhura! Repeat the final sequence.
ILIA PROBE: The Creator must join with V'Ger.
SPOCK: Voyager is not transmitting, Captain, because it did not receive the final sequence.
McCOY: Jim, we're down to ten minutes.
KIRK: Enterprise, stand by. The antenna leads are melted away.
SPOCK: Yes Captain, just now. By V'Ger itself.
KIRK: Why?
SPOCK: To prevent reception.
KIRK: Of course.
DECKER: To bring the Creator here, to finish transmitting the code in person, ...to touch the Creator.
McCOY: To capture God! V'Ger's going to be in for one hell of a disappointment.
SPOCK: Perhaps not. ...Captain, ...V'Ger must evolve. Its knowledge has reached the limits of this universe and it must evolve. What it requires of its God, Doctor is the answer to its question, 'Is there nothing more?
McCOY: What more is there than the universe, Spock?
DECKER: Other, dimensions, higher levels of beings.
SPOCK: The existence of which cannot be proved logically, therefore V'Ger is incapable of believing in them.
KIRK: What V'Ger needs in order to evolve is a human quality. Our capacity to leap beyond logic.
DECKER: And joining with its Creator might accomplish that.
McCOY: You mean that this machine wants to physically join with a human? Is that possible?
DECKER: Let' find out.
KIRK: Decker!
DECKER: I'm gonna key the sequence through the ground-test computer.
McCOY: Decker! You don't know what that will do to you.
DECKER: Yes, I do, Doctor.
KIRK: Decker, don't!
DECKER: Jim, I want this. As much as you wanted the Enterprise, I want this.
(the 'Ilia probe' merges into the incandescent cloud enveloping Decker)
[Enterprise bridge]

SULU: Captain.
KIRK: Spock! Did we just see the beginnings of a new lifeform?
SPOCK: Yes, Captain, we witnessed a birth. Possibly a next step in our evolution.
KIRK: I wonder.
McCOY: Well, it's been a long time since I delivered a baby, and I hope we got this one off to a good start.
KIRK: I hope so, too. I think we gave it the ability to create its own sense of purpose. Out of our own human weaknesses, and the drive that compels us to overcome them.
McCOY: And a lot of foolish human emotions. Right, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Quite true, Doctor. Unfortunately it will have to deal with them as well.
UHURA: A communication from Starfleet. They're requesting damage and injury reports and complete vessel status.
KIRK: Report two casualties. Lieutenant Ilia. Captain Decker.
UHURA (OC): Aye sir.
KIRK: Correction! They're not casualties. They are... List them as missing. Vessel status, fully operational. 
UHURA (OC): Aye sir.
KIRK: Mister Scott! Shall we give the Enterprise a proper shakedown?
SCOTT: I would say it's time for that, sir, aye. We can have you back on Vulcan in for days, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Unnecessary, Mister Scott. My task on Vulcan is completed.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, ahead, warp one.
SULU (OC): Warp one, sir.
DIFALCO (OC): Heading, sir?
KIRK: Out there. Thataway!
THE HUMAN ADVENTURE IS JUST BEGINNING.