CHAPTER 1
My name is Jake. That's my first name, obviously. I can't tell you my last name. It would be
too dangerous. The Controllers are everywhere. Everywhere. And if they knew my full name,
they could find me and my friends, and then... well, let's just say I don't want them to find
me. What they do to people who resist them is too horrible to think about.
I won't even tell you where I live. You'll just have to trust me that it is a real place, a real
town.
It may even be your town.
I'm writing this all down so that more people will learn the truth. Maybe then, somehow, the
human race can survive until the Andalites return and rescue us, as they promised they
would.
Maybe.
My life used to be pretty normal. Normal, that is, until one Friday night at the mall. I was
there with Marco, my best friend. We were playing video games and hanging out at this cool
store that sells comic books and stuff. The usual.
Marco and I had run out of quarters for the games, right when he was ahead by a lot of
points. Mostly, we're equally good at games. I have Sega at home so I get lots of practice
time in, but Marco has this amazing ability to analyze games and figure out all the little
tricks. So sometimes he beats me.
Or maybe I just wasn't concentrating very well. I'd had kind of a bad day at school. I'd tried
out for the basketball team and I didn't make the cut.
It was like no big deal, really. Except that Tom - he's my big brother - he was this total legend
on the junior high basketball team. Now he's the main scorer for the high school team. So
everyone expected me to make the team easy. Only I didn't.
Like I said, no big thing. But it was on my mind, just the same. Lately, Tom and I hadn't been
hanging out as much. Not like we used to. So I figured, you know, if I got his old position on
the team...
Well, anyway, we were out of money and getting ready to head home when we ran into
Tobias. Tobias was... I mean, I guess he still kind of a strange guy. He was new at school,
and he wasn't the toughest kid around, so he got picked on a lot.
I actually met Tobias when he had his head in a toilet. There were these two big guys holding
him down and laughing while they flushed, sending Tobias's straggly blond hair swirling
around the bowl. I told the two creeps to step off, and ever since then, Tobias figured I was
his friend.
"What's up?" Tobias asked.
I shrugged. "Not much. We're heading home."
3
"Out of quarters," Marco commented. "Certain people keep forgetting that the SleazeTroll
shows up right after you cross the Nether Fjord. So certain people keep losing the game - and
losing our quarter." Marco kept jerking his thumb at me, just in case Tobias couldn't figure
out who he meant by "certain people."
"So, like maybe I'll walk home with you guys," Tobias said.
I said sure. Why not?
We were heading for the exit when I spotted Rachel and Cassie. Rachel is kind of pretty, I
guess. I mean, okay, she's very pretty, although, since she is my cousin, I don't really think
about her that way. She has blond hair and blue eyes and that kind of very clean, very
wholesome look. She's one of those people who always know the right clothes to wear and
how to look like they just walked out of one of those fashion magazines girls like. She's also
very graceful because she takes gymnastics, even though she says she's too tall to ever be
really good at it.
Cassie is sort of the opposite. For one thing, she's usually wearing jeans and a plaid shirt, or
something else real casual. She's black and wears her hair very short most of the time. She
had it longer for a while, but then she went back to short, which I like. Cassie is quieter than
Rachel, more peaceful, like she always understands everything on some different, more
mystical level.
I guess you could say I kind of like Cassie. Sometimes we sit together on the bus, even
though I never know what to say to her.
"You guys going home?" I asked Rachel. "You shouldn't go through the construction site by
yourselves. I mean, being girls and all."
That was a mistake. I should never have suggested to Rachel that she's weak or helpless.
Rachel may look like Little Miss Teen Model or whatever, but she thinks she's Storm from
the X-Men.
"Are you going to come and protect us, you big, strong m-a-a-a-n?" she said. "You think
we're helpless just because - "
"I'd appreciate it if they did walk with us," Cassie interrupted. "I know you're not afraid of
anything, Rachel, but I guess I am."
Rachel couldn't say much about that. That's the way Cassie is - she always has the right
words to stop any argument without making anyone feel bad.
So, there we were. The five of us - Marco, Tobias, Rachel, Cassie, and me. Five normal mall
rats heading home.
Sometimes I think about that one, last moment when we were still just normal kids. It's like it
was a million years ago, like it was some totally different group of kids. You know what I
was afraid of right then? I was afraid of admitting to Tom that I hadn't made the team. That
was as scary as life got back then.
Five minutes later, life got a lot scarier.
4
To get home from the mall we could either go a long way around, which is the safe way, or
we could cut through this abandoned construction site and hope there weren't any ax
murderers hanging around there. My mom and dad have sworn to ground me until I'm twenty
if they ever find out I've cut through the construction site.
So anyway, we crossed the road and headed into the abandoned construction site. It was a big
area, surrounded on two sides by trees, with the highway separating it from the mall area.
There's a broad, open field between the construction site and the nearest houses. It's a very
isolated place.
Originally it was supposed to be this new shopping center. Now it was just all these halffinished
buildings looking like a ghost town. There were huge piles of rusted steel beams;
pyramids of giant concrete pipes; little mountains of dirt; deep pits that had filled up with
black, muddy water; and a creaking, rusted construction crane that I had climbed once while
Marco stayed below and told me I was being an idiot.
It was a totally deserted place, full of shadows and sounds that made the hair on the back of
your neck stand up. When Marco and I went there during the day, we always found all these
beer cans and liquor bottles. Sometimes we found the ashes of little campfires back in the
hidden nooks and crannies of the buildings. So we knew that people came there at night. All
that was on my mind as we crept through the site.
It was Tobias who saw it first. He had been walking along, gazing up at the sky. I guess he
was looking at the stars or something. That's the way Tobias is sometimes - off in his own
world.
Suddenly Tobias stopped. He was pointing. Pointing almost straight up. "Look," he said.
"What?" I didn't want to be distracted because I was pretty sure I'd heard the sound of a
chain-saw killer creeping up behind us.
"Just look," Tobias said. His voice was strange. Amazed-sounding, but serious at the same
time.
So I looked up. And there it was. A brilliant, blue-white light that scooted across the sky,
going fast at first, too fast for it to be an airplane, then slower and slower. "What is it?"
Tobias shook his head. "I don't know."
I looked at Tobias and he looked back at me. We both knew what we thought it was, but we
didn't want to say it. Marco and Rachel would have laughed, we figured.
But Cassie just blurted it right out. "It's a flying saucer!"
5
CHAPTER 2
"A flying saucer?" Marco said. He'd laugh. That is, until he looked up.
I could feel my own heart pounding in my chest. I felt weird and excited and afraid, all at
once.
"It's coming this way," Rachel said.
"It's hard to be sure." I could barely whisper, my mouth was so dry.
"No, it's coming this way," Rachel said. She has a very definite way of talking. Like she's
totally sure of everything she says.
Rachel was right. Whatever it was, it was coming closer. And it was slowing down. Now I
could see pretty clearly what it looked like.
"It's not exactly a flying saucer," I said.
First of all, it wasn't all that big. It was about as long as a school bus. The front end was a
pod, shaped almost like an egg. Extending from the back of the pod was a long, narrow shaft.
There were two crooked, stubby winglike things, and on the end of each wing was a long
tube that glowed bright blue on the back end.
The little spaceship looked almost cute. You know, kind of harmless. Except that it had a sort
of tail - a mean-looking tail that curved up and forward, corning to a point that looked as
sharp as a needle.
"That tail thing," I said. "It looks like a weapon."
"Definitely," Marco agreed.
The little ship kept coming nearer, going slower all the time.
"It's stopping," Rachel said. She had the same strange, not-quite-real tone in her voice that I
had. Like we couldn't believe what we were seeing. Like maybe we didn't want to believe.
"I think it sees us," Marco said. "Should we run? Maybe we should run home and get a
camera. Do you know how much money we could get for a video of a real UFO?"
"If we run, they might... I don't know, zap us with phasers on full power," I said. I meant it
as a joke. Kind of.
"Phasers are only on Star Trek," Marco said, rolling his eyes the way he does when he thinks
I'm being a dweeb. Like he was some kind of expert on alien spaceships. Right.
The ship stopped and hovered almost directly over our heads, maybe a hundred feet in the air.
I could feel the hair on my head standing on end. When I glanced at Rachel it was almost
funny. She has this long blond hair and it was sticking straight out in every direction. Only
Cassie looked normal.
6
"What do you think it is?" Marco asked. He sounded a little shakier, not so laid-back now
that the thing was so close. To be honest, I was a little scared, too. A little scared, as in so
terrified I couldn't move. But at the same time, it was all cool beyond any coolness ever. I
mean, it was a spaceship! Right there over my head.
Tobias was actually grinning, but that's Tobias for you. He's never scared of weird stuff. It's
the normal stuff he can't stand. "I think it's going to land," he said, this huge smile on his
face. His eyes were bright and excited, and his blond hair was standing up in clumps.
The ship began to descend. "It's coming right at us!" I cried.
I had to fight an urge to run yammering across the field all the way home, where I could
crawl into my bed and pull the covers over my head. But I knew that this was an important,
amazing thing. I knew I had to stay and see it all.
I guess the others felt the same way, because we all just stood there, as the ship hummed and
glowed and slowly settled down in an open space between piles of junk and tumbled walls. I
noticed there were black burn marks along the top of the pod section. Some of the skin of the
pod had been melted. It touched the ground and instantly the blue lights went off. Rachel's
hair fell back down onto her neck.
"It isn't very big, is it?" Rachel whispered.
"It's about - " I tried to think, "about three or four times as big as our minivan."
"We should tell someone," Marco said. "I mean, this is kind of major, you know? Spaceships
don't just land in the construction site every day. We should call the cops or the army or the
president or something. We'd be totally famous. We'd get to be on Letterman for sure."
"Yeah, you're right," I agreed. "We should call someone." But none of us moved. None of us
was just going to walk away from a spaceship,
"I wonder if we should try and talk to it," Rachel suggested. She was standing there with her
hands on her hips looking at the spaceship like it was a puzzle she had to figure out. "I mean,
we should communicate. If that's even possible."
Tobias nodded. He stepped forward and held out his hands. I guess he was showing whoever
was in the ship that he wasn't carrying any kind of weapon or anything. "It's safe," he said in
a loud, clear voice. "We won't hurt you."
"Do you think they speak English?" I wondered.
"Well, everyone speaks English on Star Trek" Cassie said with a nervous laugh.
Tobias tried again. "Please, come out We won't hurt you."
I know.
I froze. Okay, I had definitely heard someone say "I know," only... there hadn't been any
sound. I mean, I heard it, but I didn't really hear it.
7
Maybe this was all a dream. I looked kind of sideways at Cassie. She looked back at me. Our
eyes met. She had heard it, too. I looked at Rachel. She was turning her head back and forth,
like she was looking for where that sound - that wasn't a sound - could have come from. I
started to get a sick, twisty feeling in my stomach.
"Did everyone hear that?" Tobias whispered.
We all nodded at once, very slowly.
"Can you come out?" Tobias asked in his loud, talking-to-aliens voice.
Yes. Do not be frightened.
"We won't be frightened," Tobias said.
"Speak for yourself," I muttered. The others giggled nervously.
A thin arc of light appeared, a doorway, opening slowly in the smooth side of the pod part of
the ship. I stood there, totally hypnotized. I just stared, waiting.
The opening grew, like a crescent moon at first, then a full, bright circle.
And then he appeared.
My first reaction was that someone had cloned a person and a deer together. The creature had
a head and shoulders and arms that were more or less where they should have been, though
the skin was a pale shade of blue. But below that he had fur, a mix of blue and tan, covering a
four-legged body that really did look like it belonged to a deer, or maybe a small horse.
He ducked his head out the doorway and I could see that even the fairly normal-looking parts
of him weren't all that normal. For a start, he had no mouth, just three vertical slits. And then
there were his eyes. Two of them were where they should have been, although they were a
glittery green color that was kind of shocking. But the real shock was the other eyes. He had
what seemed like horns, only on the top of each horn was an eye. The horns could move,
twisting to point the eyes front and back or up and down.
I thought the eyes were bad, until I saw the tail. It was like a scorpion's tail, thick and
powerful-looking. On the end was a wickedly curved, very sharp-looking horn or stinger. It
reminded me of the alien's spaceship. It had seemed kind of cute and harmless, till you
noticed the tail. The alien seemed kind of harmless at first glance, too. Then you saw that tail
of his and you thought, whoa, this guy could do some damage if he wanted.
"Hello," Tobias said. His voice was gentle, like he was talking to a baby. He was grinning.
I realized I was smiling, too. And at the same moment, I realized that there were tears in my
eyes, I can't really describe how it felt, except that it seemed like the alien was someone I'd
known forever. Like an old friend I hadn't seen in a long, longtime.
Hello, the alien said, in that silent way that you only heard inside your head.
"Hi," we all said back.
8
To my surprise, the alien staggered. He fell out of the ship to the ground. Tobias tried to grab
him and hold him up, but the alien slipped from his grasp and fell back to the dirt.
"Look!" Cassie cried. She pointed at a burn that covered half the alien's right side. "He's hurt.
"
Yes. I am dying, he said.
"Can we help you? We can call an ambulance or something," Marco said.
"We can bandage that wound," Cassie said. "Jake, give me your shirt. We can tear it up and
make bandages." Cassie's parents are both veterinarians and she's totally into animals. Not
that this was an animal. Not exactly, anyway.
No. I will die. The wound is fatal.
"NO!" I cried. "You can't die. You're the first alien ever to come to Earth. You can't die." I
don't know why I was so upset. I just knew that way down deep inside, it hurt me to think of
him dying.
I am not the first. There are many, many others.
"Other aliens? Like you?" Tobias demanded.
The alien shook his big head slowly, side to side. Not like me.
Then he cried out in pain, a silent sound that echoed horribly inside my mind. For a moment,
I had actually felt him dying.
Not like me, he repeated. They are different.
"Different? How?" I said.
I will remember his answer forever.
He said, They have come to destroy you.
9
CHAPTER 3
They have come to destroy you.
It was strange, the way we all just knew he was telling the truth. No one said "no way" or
"you're making it up." We all just knew. He was dying, and he was trying to warn us of
something terrible.
They are called Yeerks. They are different from us. Different from you, as well.
"Are you telling us they're already here on Earth?" Rachel demanded.
Many are here. Hundreds. Maybe more.
"Why hasn't anybody noticed them?" Marco said reasonably. "I think someone would have
mentioned it at school."
You do not understand. Yeerks are different. They have no body, like yours or mine. They
live in the bodies of other species. They are... 
I guess he couldn't think of a word to explain Yeerks, so he closed his eyes and seemed to
concentrate. Suddenly a bright picture popped into my head. I saw a gray-green, slimy thing
like a snail without its shell, only bigger, the size of a rat, maybe. It wasn't a pretty picture.
"I'm guessing that was a Yeerk," Marco said. "Either that or a very big wad of slimy chewing
gum."
They are almost powerless without hosts. They - 
Suddenly we felt that blast of pain, straight from the alien. I could also feel his sadness. He
knew his time was almost up.
The Yeerks are parasites. They must have a host to live in. In this form they are known as
Controllers. They enter the brain and are absorbed into it, taking over the host's thoughts and
feelings. They try to get the host to accept them voluntarily. It is easier that way. Otherwise
the host may be able to resist, at least a little.
"Are you saying they take over human beings?" Rachel asked. "People? These things take
over their bodies?"
"Look, this is serious stuff," I said. "You shouldn't be telling us. We're just kids, you know.
This is like something the government should know about."
We had hoped to stop them, the alien continued. Swarms of their Bug fighters were
waiting when our Dome ship came out of Z-Space. We knew of their mother ship and were
ready for the Bug fighters, but the Yeerks surprised us - they had hidden a powerful Blade
ship in a crater of your moon. We fought, but... we lost. They have tracked me here. They
will be here soon to eliminate all traces of me and my ship.
"How can they do that?" Cassie wondered.
10
The alien seemed to smile with his eyes. Their Dracon beams will leave nothing behind but
a few molecules of this ship, and... this body he said. I sent a message to my home
world. We Andalites fight the Yeerks wherever they go throughout the universe. My people
will send help, but it may take a year, even more, and by then the Yeerks will have control of
this planet. After that, there is no hope. You must tell people. You must warn your people!
Another spasm of pain ripped through him, and we all knew he was nearly gone.
"No one is ever going to believe us," Marco said hopelessly. He looked at me and shook his
head. "No way."
He was right. If these Yeerks were to wipe out the Andalite's ship, how on Earth would we
ever convince people? They'd think we were either nuts or on drugs.
"I don't care if he thinks he's going to die, we have to try and help him," Rachel said. "We can
get him to a hospital. Or maybe Cassie's parents... "
There is no time. No time, the Andalite said. Then his eyes brightened. Perhaps... 
"What?"
Go into my ship. You will see a small blue box, very plain. Bring it to me. Quickly! I have
very little time, and the Yeerks will find me soon.
We all looked at each other. Who was going to be the one to go inside the ship? Somehow we
all seemed to agree it would be me. Actually, I didn't agree, but everyone else did.
"Go ahead," Tobias said. "I want to stay with him." He knelt beside the Andalite and placed a
comforting hand on the alien's narrow shoulder,
I looked at the doorway into the spacecraft. I glanced at Cassie.
"Go ahead," she said, sending me a smile. "You're not scared."
She was wrong; I was plenty scared. But the way she smiled at me, I wasn't about to weasel
out.
I walked over to the door of the ship and looked inside. It was surprisingly simple. It looked
cozy, almost. Everything was a creamy color with rounded edges and shapes that tended to
be oval. That was one of the things that helped me to spot the box so easily. It was sky blue
and square, maybe four inches on each side. It seemed kind of heavy for being so small.
I stepped up into the ship. There was no chair, just a sort of open space where I guess the
Andalite stood on his four hooves while he worked the few controls. There weren't a lot of
buttons or anything. I wondered if the Andalite controlled the ship with his thoughts.
I quickly reached for the box and started to head back outside. But then something caught my
eye. It was a small, three-dimensional picture - four Andalites, standing all together, looking
like a strange gathering of deer with solemn faces. Two of them looked very small kids. I
realized that this was a picture of the Andalite's family.
11
It filled me with sadness to think that here he was, dying, a million miles from his family.
Dying because he had tried to protect the people of Earth. I felt a small flame of anger against
the Yeerks, or Controllers, or whatever they were, for causing this.
I went back to the circle of my friends.
"Here's the box," I told the Andalite.
Thank you.
"I, um... was that your family? That picture?"
Yes.
I'm real sorry," I said. What else could I say?
There is something I may be able to do to help you fight the Yeerks.
"What?" Rachel demanded.
I know that you are young. I know that you have no power with which to resist the
Controllers. But I may be able to give you some small powers that may help.
We all looked at each other. All except Tobias, who never took his gaze off the alien.
If you wish, I can give you powers that no other human being has ever had.
"Powers?" What was that supposed to mean?
It is a piece of Andalite technology that the Yeerks do not have, the Andalite explained.
A technology that enables us to pass unnoticed in many parts of the universe - the power to
morph. We have never shared this power. But your need is great.
"Morph? Morph how?" Rachel asked, her eyes narrowed.
To change your bodies, the Andalite said. To become any other species. Any animal.
Marco laughed derisively. "Become animals?" Marco isn't the most accepting person in the
world,
You will only need to touch a creature, to acquire its DNA pattern, and you will be able to
become that creature. It requires concentration and determination, but, if you are strong, you
can do it. There are... limitations. Problems. Dangers, even. But there is no time to explain
it all... no time. You will have to learn for yourselves. But first, do you wish to receive this
power?
"He's kidding, right?" Marco asked me.
"No," Tobias said softly. "He's not kidding."
12
"This is nuts," Marco said. "This whole thing is nuts. Yeerks and spaceships and slugs taking
over people's brains and Andalites and the power to change into animals? Give me a break."
"Yeah, it is beyond weird," I agreed.
"We're off the map of weirdness by this point," Rachel said. "But unless we're all just
dreaming, I think we'd better deal with this."
"He's dying," Tobias reminded us.
"I'll do it," Cassie said. That surprised me. Cassie isn't usually so quick to decide. But I guess,
like Tobias, she felt the truth of what the Andalite was saying.
"I think we should all decide together," I suggested. "One way or the other."
"What's that?" Rachel asked. She was looking up toward the stars. Far, far overhead, two
pinpoints of bright red light were shooting across the sky.
Yeerks. The Andalite said the word in our minds, and we could feel his hatred.
13
CHAPTER 4
Yeerks!
The twin red lights slowed. They turned in a circle and came back toward us.
There is no more time. You must decide!
"We have to do this," Tobias said. "How else can we fight these Controllers?"
"This is so insane!" Marco said. "Insane."
"I'd like more time, but we don't have that choice," Rachel said. I'm for it."
"What do you say, Jake?" Cassie asked me. It was odd. Like suddenly I was the one who had
to decide for everyone?
I looked up at the Yeerk ships. What had the Andalite called them? Bug fighters? They were
circling closer, like dogs sniffing for a scent. I looked down at the Andalite and remembered
the picture of his family. Would they even know what had happened to him?
I looked at each of the people around me - my usually funny, occasionally annoying best
friend, Marco; Rachel, my smart, pretty, confident cousin; and Cassie, who everyone knew
liked animals more than she liked most people.
Finally, I looked at Tobias. It was weird, the feeling I had at that moment, staring at him. A
chill or something.
"We have to," Tobias said to me.
Slowly I nodded. "Yes. We have no choice."
Then each of you, press your hand against one of the sides of the square.
We did. Five hands, each pressed against one side. Then a sixth hand, different from ours,
with too many fingers.
Do not be afraid, the Andalite said.
Something like a shock, only pleasurable, seemed to run through me. A tingle that almost
made me laugh.
Go now, the Andalite said. Only remember this - never remain in animal form for more
than two of your Earth hours. Never! That is the greatest danger of the morphing! If you stay
longer than two hours you will be trapped, unable to return to human form.
"Two hours," I repeated.
Suddenly some new fear washed through the Andalite's mind. Linked as I was to him, I could
feel it as a dread that crawled up my spine. He was staring up at the sky with his main eyes.
Something else was up there with the Bug fighters.
14
Visser Three! He comes.
"What?" I was shaking with this new terror. "What's a Visser? Who's a Visser?"
Go now. Run! Visser Three is here. He is the most deadly of your enemies. Of all Yeerks he
alone has the power to morph, The same power you now have. Run!
"No, we'll stay with you," Rachel said firmly. "Maybe we can help."
Again it was as if the alien was smiling at us with his eyes. No. You must save yourselves.
Save yourselves and save your planet! The Yeerks are here.
We all looked up, craning our necks. Sure enough, the two red lights were sinking toward us.
And they had been joined by a third ship, far larger, black as a shadow within a shadow.
"But how are we supposed to fight these... these Controllers?" Rachel demanded.
You must find a way. Now run!
I jerked from the force of his command. "He's right. Run!" I yelled.
We ran. All but Tobias, who knelt beside the Andalite and took his hand. The Andalite
pressed his other hand against Tobias's head. Tobias rocked back, like he'd been shocked.
Then he, too, was up and running, stumbling over the loose junk and potholes of the
construction site.
A beam of bright red light snapped on. It was a spotlight from one of the Bug fighters. The
beam lit up the fallen Andalite and his ship. A spotlight from the second Bug fighter joined
the first, and the Andalite shone brilliant as a star.
I hit the dirt hard. I saw my leg lit up within the circle of that spotlight. I yanked it to me and
crawled fast, scraping my elbows and knees over sharp stones.
The five of us crouched behind a low, crumbled wall, afraid to move, afraid to look, but just
as afraid to look away.
Slowly the Bug fighters descended. It was easy to see where they'd gotten their nickname.
They were slightly larger than the Andalite fighter and shaped like legless cockroaches.
There were small windows like eyes on the forward-thrust head of the bug. And on either
side of the head were two very long, very sharp, serrated spears.
The Yeerk Bug fighters touched down, one on either side of the Andalite ship.
"Okay, you can wake me up now," Marco said in a rattled whisper. "I've had enough of this
dream."
The larger ship began to descend. I don't know what it was about that ship, but as it got closer
I started to feel like I couldn't breathe. I tried to suck in a deep lungful of air and couldn't. I
tried to swallow and couldn't. I wanted to run, but my legs were jelly. I was shaking from a
fear so deep it was like nothing I'd ever experienced before. It was the same fear that the
Andalite had shown when he'd realized Visser Three was coming.
15
The ship settled toward the ground. It looked like it was going to land directly on a big rusted
earthmover parked there. But as the Visser's ship descended, the earthmover just sizzled and
disappeared.
Visser Three's ship was built like some ancient weapon. It reminded me of one of those
battle-axes the old-time knights used when they were hacking off the heads of their foes.
There was a main part, like the handle of the ax, with a big, triangular point on the front. That
part had to be the bridge. At the rear were two huge, scimitar wings. It was eight or ten times
the size of the Bug fighters.
The Blade ship landed. A door opened.
Cassie started to scream. I clamped my hand over her mouth.
They leaped from the ship, whirling and thrusting and slicing the air - creatures that looked
like walking weapons. They stood on two bent-back legs and had two very long arms. On
each arm there were curved horn-blades growing out of the wrist and elbow. There were
other blades at their bent-back knees, and two more blades at the end of their tails. They had
feet like a Tyrannosaurus rex.
But it was the head that got your attention - a neck like a snake, a mouth that was almost a
falcon's beak, and, from the forehead, three daggerlike horns raked forward.
Hork-Bajir-Controllers.
I jumped, hearing the Andalite's words in my mind again. They were fainter than before,
strained, like someone yelling from far away.
"Did you guys... ?" I asked.
Rachel nodded. "Yeah."
The Hork-Bajir are a good people, despite their fearsome looks, the Andalite said. But
they have been enslaved by the Yeerks. Each of them now carries a Yeerk in his head. They
are to be pitied.
"Pity. Right," Rachel said grimly. "They're walking killing machines. Look at them!"
But our attention was drawn away by a new form that crept and slithered and shimmied out
of the Blade ship.
Taxxon-Controllers, the Andalite said. I knew he was trying to tell us all he could, even to
the end. Trying to prepare us for what we were up against,
The Taxxons are evil.
"Yeah," Marco muttered. "I think I would have guessed that."
16
They were like massive centipedes, twice as long as a grown man. So big around that if you
tried to hug one, your arms wouldn't make it even halfway. Not that anyone would ever want
to.
They had dozens of legs that supported the lower two thirds of their bodies. The top third was
held upright, and there the rows of legs became smaller, with little lobster-claw hands.
Around the top of their disgusting, tubular bodies were four eyes, each like a wiggling
globule of red Jell-O. And at the very end, pointing straight up in the air, was a round mouth,
ringed by hundreds of tiny teeth.
Hork-Bajir and Taxxons poured from the Blade ship, spreading out around the area like welltrained
Marines. They were holding small, pistol-sized things that were definitely weapons.
They formed a ring around the Andalite and his ship.
Suddenly, one of the Hork-Bajir came straight toward us. He took one big, bounding step and
he was practically on top of us.
I hugged the dirt like it was my last hope. I wished I could dig a hole. I saw a flash of Marco's
face. His eyes were huge. His lips were drawn back in what could have been a grin, except
that I knew it was an expression of pure terror.
17
CHAPTER 5
The Hork-Bajir pointed his gun, or whatever it was, around at the darkness. His snake head
swerved left and right, trying to penetrate the gloom.
Silence! the Andalite warned us. Hork-Bajir do not see well in darkness, but their hearing
is very good.
The Hork-Bajir moved closer still. He was six feet away now, with just the low wall between
us. He had to have heard my heart pounding. Maybe he didn't know what the sound was.
Maybe he didn't recognize the sounds of five terrified kids whose knees were quivering and
teeth were chattering. Kids who were breathing in short, sudden gasps.
I was sure I was going to die, right then. I could see in my mind the way those vicious wristand
elbow-blades were going to slice my head from my body.
If you've never been really afraid, let me tell you - it does things to you. It takes over your
mind and your body. You want to scream. You want to run. You want to wet your pants. You
want to throw yourself down on the ground and cry and beg please, please, please, please
don't kill me!
And if you think you're brave, well, wait till you're cowering a few feet away from a monster
who can turn you into coleslaw in about three seconds flat.
But then the Andalite's voice was in my head again. Courage, my friends.
And this... this warm... this... I don't have any words to explain it. It was just this
warmth that spread all through me. It was like when you're a little kid and you've had a
terrible nightmare and you've woken up screaming. You know how you used to feel better
when your mom or dad would turn on the light and come in and sit beside you in bed?
That's what it was like.
I mean, I was still terrified. The Hork-Bajir was still there, so real and so deadly. I could hear
him breathing, I could smell him. But at the same time, I could feel the panic coming under
control. I could feel the strength flowing from the doomed Andalite. He was letting us borrow
some of his courage, even though he must have been afraid himself.
The Hork-Bajir moved away. Something new was coming from the Blade ship.
Shaking and chattering, I rose high enough to look over the low wall. Every Hork-Bajir and
every Taxxon was turned toward the ship now.
"They're all standing at attention," I whispered.
"How can you tell?" Marco whispered back. "Who knows when a jelly-eyed centipede or a
walking Salad Shooter from Hell is standing at attention?"
Then he appeared.
Visser Three, the Andalite said,
Visser Three was an Andalite.
18
Or at least he was an Andalite-Controller.
"What the... " Rachel said. "Isn't that an Andalite?"
Only once has a Yeerk been able to take an Andalite body, the Andalite said. There is
only one Andalite-Controller. That one is Visser Three,
Visser Three walked confidently toward the wounded Andalite. The Visser seemed so much
like the Andalite it was hard to tell them apart at first. He had the same mouthless face; the
same extra stalk-eyes that turned here and there, checking out everything in all directions; the
same powerful yet sleek four-legged body; and the same wicked tail.
But if the Visser looked like any normal Andalite, he felt different. It was like he was
wearing a mask, only you just knew that under the fake sweetness of the mask there was
something twisted and foul.
Well, well, Visser Three said.
I almost had a heart attack when I realized I was hearing the Visser's thoughts.
"Can he hear our thoughts?" Cassie whispered.
"If he can we're so dead I don't even want to think about it," Rachel told her.
He cannot hear your thoughts, the Andalite said. As long as you don't direct them to him.
You hear his thoughts because he is broadcasting them for all to hear. This is a great victory
for him, so he wants all to hear.
What have we here? A meddling Andalite? Visser Three looked more closely at the
Andalite's ship. Ah, but no ordinary Andalite warrior. Prince Elfangor-Sirinial-Shamtul, if I
am not mistaken. An honor to meet you. You're a legend. How many of our fighters have you
shredded? Seven, or was it eight by the time the battle ended?
The Andalite didn't answer. But I had the feeling maybe it had been more than eight.
The very last Andalite in this sector of space. Yes, I'm afraid your Dome ship has been
completely destroyed. Completely. I watched it burn as it fell into the atmosphere of this little
world.
There will be others, the Andalite prince said...
The Visser took a step closer to the Andalite. Yes, and when they come it will be too late.
This world will be mine. My own contribution to the Yeerk Empire, Our greatest conquest.
And then I'll be Visser One.
What do you want with these Humans? the Andalite asked. You have your Taxxon allies.
You have your Hork-Bajir slaves. And other slaves from other worlds. Why these people?
Because there are so many, and they are so weak, Visser Three sneered. Billions of
bodies! And they have no idea what's happening. With this many hosts we can spread
19
throughout the universe, unstoppable! Billions of us. We'll have to build a thousand new
Yeerk pools just to raise Yeerks for half this number of bodies. Face it, Andalite, you have
fought well and bravely. But you have lost
Visser Three stepped right up to the Andalite. I could feel the Andalite's fear, but rather than
cower, he fought the pain of his wound and climbed to his feet. He knew he was going to die.
He wanted to die on his feet, looking his enemy in the face.
But Visser Three was not done taunting his foe. I promise you one thing, Prince Elfangor -
when we have this planet, with its rich harvest of bodies, we will move against the Andalite
home world. I will personally hunt down your family. And I will personally oversee the
placement of my most faithful lieutenants in their heads. I hope that they will resist, so I can
hear their minds scream.
The Andalite struck!
His tail whipped up and over, so fast you couldn't really see it. The Visser twisted his head
aside. The Andalite's tail blade missed the Visser's head by a bare half-inch. But it sliced into
his shoulder. Blood - or something like blood - sprayed from the wound.
"Yes!" I hissed.
Aaaaaarrrrrgh! I could hear the Visser's howl of pain in my head.
At the same time, a blinding beam of blue light shot from the tail of the Andalite ship. It
sliced into the nearest Bug fighter. Hork-Bajir and Taxxons scattered.
Even crouching behind the wall, I could feel a wave of blistering heat. The Bug fighter
sizzled and disappeared.
Fire! Visser Three yelled. Burn his ship!
The night exploded in blinding light. Red beams lanced from the Blade ship and the
remaining Bug fighter. The Andalite ship glowed, and, with a strange slowness,
disintegrated.
Then, in the flash and glow of Dracon beams I saw... or thought I saw... humans. A small
group of them, maybe three or four, back in the shadows behind the Visser.
"There are people over there," I told Marco.
"What? Are they prisoners?"
Take the Andalite, Visser Three ordered his soldiers. Hold him for me.
Three big Hork-Bajir grabbed the Andalite and held him down. Their wrist blades were at his
throat, but they knew better than to kill him.
That was to be Visser Three's personal privilege.
20
Then we saw why a Yeerk as powerful as Visser Three would inhabit the only captured
Andalite body. As we watched, Visser Three began to morph.
His Andalite head grew large, larger. Much larger. The four horselike legs merged into two
and then expanded, each leg becoming as big around as a redwood tree. The delicate Andalite
arms sprouted and became tentacles.
"This isn't real," Cassie whispered. "This isn't real."
In the hideously bloated head, a mouth appeared. It was filled with teeth as long as your arm.
The mouth grew wider and wider, becoming a monstrous, terrifying grin.
There was nothing left of the Andalite body, A monster had taken its place.
"R-r-r-r-a-a-a-w-w-w-w-g-g-g!" The roar of the beast Visser Three had become made the
ground shake.
I covered my ears with my hands.
"R-r-r-r-r-r-a-a-a-a-g-g-g!"
My teeth rattled from the sound. I heard someone whimpering. It was me.
Visser Three had become a monster that made the Hork-Bajir and the Taxxons look like
harmless toys. He reached out with one thick tentacle and grabbed the Andalite by the neck.
"No, no, no," I heard Cassie whispering over and over again. "No, no, no, no."
"Don't look," Rachel said to her. She put her arm around Cassie's shoulder and held her close.
Then she reached for Tobias and took his hand. I guess you never really know someone till
you see them scared. And even scared to death, with tears running down her face, Rachel had
strength to spare.
Visser Three lifted the Andalite straight up in the air, tearing him from the grasp of the HorkBajir.
The Andalite prince struck again and again with his tail. But each strike was like a
pinprick against such a creature.
Visser Three held the Andalite high in the air.
And then Visser Three opened his mouth wide.
21
CHAPTER 6
I don't know what came over me right then. I had been so afraid. So terrified. But it was like
something just snapped in my head. I couldn't just hide and watch, f couldn't.
"You filthy - "
I jumped to my feet. I snatched up a piece of rusted iron pipe from the ground and started to
climb over that wall.
I guess I just went crazy or something. It had to be craziness, because there was no way that
I, alone, armed with a piece of pipe, was going to accomplish anything.
No!
The Andalite's silent cry made me hesitate. I felt Marco's hands grabbing at my shirt and
pulling me back. Tobias and Marco held me down. Rachel put her hand over my mouth. I
was trying to scream, or curse, or something.
"Shut up, you idiot!" Marco hissed. "You're just going to get us all killed."
"Jake, don't." Cassie put her hand on my cheek. "He doesn't want you to die for him. Don't
you realize? He's dying for us."
I shoved Marco and Tobias away angrily. But I was in control of myself again.
I peeked over the wall again. The Andalite prince was helpless in the grasp of Visser Three. I
saw him held high in the air. I saw Visser Three open his monstrous, gaping jaws.
I saw the Andalite fall into that open mouth.
The mouth closed. The teeth ripped the Andalite apart. And the Andalite Prince ElfangorSirinial-Shamtul
died.
At the very end, he cried out. His cry of despair was in our heads. His cry will always be in
our heads.
The Hork-Bajir-Controllers began making a huffing sound, like whuh-whuh-whuh. Maybe
they were laughing or applauding. The Taxxon-Controllers rushed forward and crowded
around Visser Three. They seemed to be stretching up toward him, and then I saw why - a
piece of the Andalite fell from the Visser's jaws and the nearest Taxxon greedily gobbled it
up.
Tobias turned away and covered his face with his hands. Cassie had tears streaming from her
eyes. So did I.
I heard a sound that was strange because it was so normal. It was laughter. Human laughter.
The humans... the Human-Controllers - because that's what they were - were laughing, like
they were at some kind of a show. For a moment ft seemed to me that one of those laughing
voices was familiar, like I'd heard it before. But then the sound was swallowed up in the
huffing of the Hork-Bajir.
22
Visser Three morphed out of his monstrous form and slowly regained his Andalite body.
Ah, I heard him think, nothing like a good Antarean Bogg morph for... taking a bite out
of your enemies.
Again the Human-Controllers laughed and the Hork-Bajir-Controllers huffed, and I heard a
familiar human laugh I could not quite place.
Marco started throwing up. It was an understandable thing to do. But somehow that sound
caught the attention of the nearest Hork-Bajir.
The snake head turned. He was perfectly still.
We were perfectly still.
The Hork-Bajir turned toward us. The nearsighted eyes were aimed directly at our little
hiding place.
I don't know who panicked first. Maybe it was me. Maybe we'd just had all the fear and
horror we could stand. It was like an electric shock went through all of us. We were running
before I had a chance to even know what I was doing.
I ran. I gasped for air.
A cry went up from the Hork-Bajir.
"Split up," I yelled. "They can't follow all of us."
Marco and Tobias and Cassie took off in three different directions. Rachel was still right
beside me. Glancing back, I saw the Hork-Bajir hesitate, unsure of who to chase.
Rachel and I are the fastest runners. Tobias is totally out of shape, and Marco and Cassie are
too short to be really fast. So I figured if the aliens were going to chase anyone, it ought to be
us.
I guess Rachel thought the same thing. She slowed down just a little and began yelling and
waving her arms. "Come on, come on, you - " And then she said some words I didn't realize
Rachel even knew.
The two nearest Hork-Bajir snapped around and took off after us. "Ghafrash! Here! Ghafrash
fit! Enemy! Get!"
Even in my panic it surprised me. They were talking some mix of their own alien language
and ours.
"Ghafrash fit nahar! I get! I kill!"
I ran. Suddenly my foot slammed something and I was down. I hit the ground hard. The wind
was knocked out of me. I tried to fill my lungs again. Rachel ran on. She didn't know I had
fallen.
23
A spear of red light struck a concrete pipe just beside me. The concrete vaporized. The two
Hork-Bajir were coming after us, bounding like some devil kangaroos. I was up and running.
Rachel must have realized I wasn't with her anymore. She stopped and started to come back
toward me.
"Don't be an idiot!" I yelled. "Run!"
She hesitated just a second. But she knew she couldn't do anything more for me. She ran.
I saw a dark hole ahead and raced toward it.
A doorway. Inside it was as black as a grave. It was one of the buildings that had almost been
completed. Just bare concrete walls and scattered junk. But I knew I had been in here before.
Marco and I had walked all through it. There were hallways and little side rooms. It was like
a maze.
Marco! Rachel! Had they gotten away? And what about Cassie and Tobias?
I tried to get my brain to concentrate as I scurried across the first big room. There was a
corridor... somewhere. I groped in the dark and found a wall.
I heard the sound of clawlike feet, huge, tearing, rending claw feet scraping over the bare
concrete. A bottle went skittering across the floor.
The Hork-Bajir was close! And in the total darkness my superior human vision wasn't much
use. But I knew my way around the empty building.
At least, I would have known my way around if my brain had been working.
I felt my hand go into emptiness. A doorway. Yes! It led down a hallway. I went through just
as the light came on behind me. Someone had brought a flashlight
"Efnud to tell fallay nyot fit? Whatever order."
"No. No need to capture them. Whoever you find, kill."
The first voice had been Hork-Bajir. The second voice was human. And the weird thing was,
that voice sounded familiar. I tried to think. I knew I'd heard that voice somewhere. Where?
Where?
"Just save the head," the human told the Hork-Bajir. "Bring that to me and we can identify it.
"
I slid quickly along the wall.
The light followed just steps behind me.
I racked my brains. Had there been a passageway... ? Yes, there it was. As silently as I
could, I slipped into it. The flashlight beam was just inches behind me.
I kicked something soft.
24
"Hey!"
It was a man! He had been lying on the ground, wrapped in a blanket.
"Hey, get outta here. This is my place, and I ain't got nothin' for you to steal."
I started to warn him, but one of the Hork-Bajir was there!
The flashlight landed on the homeless man's face. He blinked like an owl.
There was an alcove. Right behind me. I backed through.
The homeless guy screamed. I heard the sound of a scuffle.
Maybe the guy got away. I hope so.
But I never found out, because with the Hork-Bajir distracted, I ran.
I ran and ran and ran. And as I ran, I really hoped it was all just a dream.
25
CHAPTER 7
Somehow I made it home. I don't know how. I have no memories of anything after that last
sight of the Hork-Bajir.
I wish I had no memories of anything that happened that night. If only I could forget it all...
I called around to the others. Everyone was shaky, but they were all alive. Rachel kept trying
to apologize for leaving me. Marco just kept asking me if I was sure this wasn't a dream.
I guess I should have had the worst nightmares of my life that night, but I didn't. The world
of nightmares was a joke compared to my new reality.
But by the next morning, a Saturday, I half believed it all had been a nightmare. The only
thing that seemed real... really real... was the way the Andalite had of smiling with just
his eyes.
I woke when my mom started pounding on my door.
"Jake, are you awake in there?"
I was now. "Um, yeah," I groaned. "I'm up."
"Your friend Tobias is here,"
"Tobias?" What was Tobias doing here?
"It's me." Tobias's voice. "Can I come in?"
"Um, sure." I sat up in my bed and blinked several times, trying to get my eyes unglued. The
door opened. I heard Tobias say thank you to my mom.
He was glowing. I swear, he was glowing. Not like he was radioactive or anything, I don't
mean that. It's just that his eyes were shining bright, and his face was one big grin, and he
seemed to be tingling with energy, bouncing like he couldn't standstill.
"I did it," Tobias said.
I tried to get my hair to go in one direction by raking my fingers through it. "What are you
talking about?"
I was yawning when he answered.
"I became Dude."
I stopped yawning. My mouth actually snapped shut. Dude is Tobias's cat. "Huh?"
Tobias glanced around like there might be spies in the room. "I became Dude. Just like the
Andalite said."
I just stared.
26
"It was so amazing. It didn't hurt or anything. I was petting him, and thinking about the whole
thing last night, right? So I thought, why not give it a try?" He was pacing back and forth,
snapping his fingers, bursting with enthusiasm. Very unlike Tobias.
"I didn't even know how to begin. So I just made sure the door to my room was locked.
Fortunately, my uncle was still asleep."
Tobias has the most screwed-up family I know. He never knew who his father was, and his
mom just decided to leave him a few years ago. Since then he'd been shuttled back and forth
between his uncle here, and his aunt, who lives on the other coast. His aunt and his uncle
can't stand each other, and it's like Tobias is some burden they each try to shove off on the
other. I get the feeling neither of them cares about Tobias. '
"So there I was, just sitting on my bed, thinking about it. Concentrating. Thinking about
becoming Dude. I looked down at my hand." He grinned at me. "What do you think I saw,
Jake?"
I shook my head slowly. "I don't know."
"I had fur, Jake. And I was growing claws. You should have seen the real Dude. He went
nuts. I had to put him outside before I could morph all the way. He clawed me up pretty
good." Tobias stuck a sliced finger into his mouth.
I swallowed hard. Okay, this was definitely crazy now. "Um, Tobias, is it possible you maybe
just dreamed all this?"
"Not a dream," he said. Now he was serious Tobias again. The grin was gone. "It's all true,
Jake. All of it."
His eyes met mine. I knew what he was saying. He had tried to pretend it was all a nightmare,
too. But it was real. I looked away. I didn't want to start believing it had all been real. I
wanted it all safely stored away in my head, just another bad dream. Bad dreams should stay
in your head, not come jumping out into real life.
"I just kept concentrating on changing," Tobias said, "and in a few minutes, I was... not
myself anymore."
His eyes bored in on me. "You have no idea what it's like, Jake. Being a cat is so... it's... I
can't even describe it. You're so strong, for one thing. Just all this coiled power, and the way
you can move! You know what I did? I jumped onto my dresser Three feet straight up in the
air, and I landed like a feather. Three feet! You know how high that is when you're a cat? It's
like a person jumping maybe thirty feet straight up."
He stopped suddenly and looked at me. "You don't believe me, do you?" he said.
"Look, Tobias, it's just that sometimes it's hard to tell the difference between something real
and something you're just imagining or dreaming."
"You think I'm crazy."
I considered for a minute. "I don't know, Tobias, let's review the facts. You say you turned
into your own pet cat. Turned into an actual cat. Yes, I have to say that sounds crazy to me."
27
Tobias nodded thoughtfully. He gave a little smile. "I understand, Jake. You still don't want it
to be true."
"What? You mean do I want to believe that you can change yourself into a cat? And all the
rest of it? Do I wanted believe that Earth is being invaded by slimy slugs who live in people's
brains and turn them into slaves? Do I want to believe that... that... Duh! No! I don't want
to believe any of it."
"And how about the Andalite?" he asked in a quiet voice.
I hesitated. I don't know why, but I didn't want to just pretend the Andalite away.
Tobias put his hand on my arm. "Stand right there."
"What? What are you going to do?"
"I'm going to help you decide whether it's real or not."
"Tobias... "
"Just wait And don't scream or anything."
So I waited.
For a few seconds, nothing happened. Tobias just stood there. I glanced at his face. His eyes.
.. his eyes were different. The pupils weren't completely round anymore. I swear there was a
reflective greenish light in them. And his mouth was protruding a little, puffing out.
He was shrinking. Growing smaller right before my eyes.
The neck of his shirt was loose. His pants started scrunching up at the ankles. He was
shriveling. And at the same time fur - yes, fur! - began to grow on his hands and neck and
face. It was gray, striped with black, just like Dude's.
I had this absurd desire to start giggling. Tobias was becoming a tabby cat! But I knew if I
started giggling I'd just keep on and on and never, ever be able to stop.
Tobias was more cat than human now. The pointed ears rose atop his head. The whiskers
stuck straight out from beneath his delicate pink nose. He had dropped to all fours, clothing
now half-draped over him, like so many rags. His tail twitched. Yes - his tail.
I wondered if I would just drop dead from the lump that had filled my throat, or from the
jack-hammer pounding of my heart. Then I wondered if I was still asleep.
But if it was a dream, it was a really convincing one.
I was standing there in my bedroom, staring down at a gray-black cat that less than two
minutes earlier had been my friend, Tobias.
28
CHAPTER 8
"I hope I'm asleep," I muttered. "I really do."
You're not asleep.
"Is that you?" I demanded of the cat.
Can you hear me? Tobias sounded surprised. Although "sounded" wasn't quite the right
word.
"Yes," I said cautiously.
I did not know I could send thoughts like this, Tobias said. Just like the Andalite.
"I guess it only works when you're... morphed."
I am talking to a cat! I realized. And I thought Tobias was crazy?
I wondered if Tobias had heard my thought. I concentrated. Tobias, can you hear me?
Yeah, he said. I hear you.
"Did you hear my thoughts before that?" I asked.
No. I don't think it works that way. You have to think at me for me to hear. Hey, watch
this.
Suddenly Tobias leaped through the air. He pounced precisely on an autographed baseball
that was lying in the corner. Maybe a four-foot jump.
That is so excellent! Hey, pull a string for me to chase.
"Pull a string? Why?"
Because it's so fun!
I dug in my desk drawer and found a length of string left over from a birthday gift. I'm not
exactly big on keeping my room clean. The string was from a birthday two years ago,
"How's this?" I drew the string slowly across the floor, a foot or more from Tobias's nose. He
settled back on his haunches and began wiggling his hindquarters. He pounced! He landed on
the string, grabbed it in his sharp teeth, rolled over, and began ripping at the string like it was
the only thing on Earth that mattered.
I tried pulling the string away, but he pounced again.
Yes! Got it!
"Tobias, what are you doing?"
Pull it faster! I see it! I got it!
29
"Tobias, what are you doing?" I shouted. "You're playing with a string!"
Suddenly he stopped. His tail twitched. He looked up at me with those cold cat eyes, but I'm
sure I saw a look of confusion there.
I... I don't know, he admitted. It's like... like I'm me, but I'm also Dude. I want to
chase strings, and oh man, if only there was a real, live mouse around! I'd really love to track
it. To follow it so quietly. To listen to its heartbeat. To hear its scratchy little feet. I'd wait till
just the right moment, and then a perfect pounce through the air, claws stretched out...  He
extended his claws to demonstrate.
"Tobias, I think we're learning something here," I said. Amazing, how quickly I was
becoming used to the idea of talking to a cat.
What? What are we learning?
"I think you aren't just Tobias. You really are a cat. I mean, you have all the same instincts.
You want to do the things a cat wants to do."
Yes. I can feel it. It's like I'm two different animals melded into one. I can think like a
person and like a cat
"You'd better change back," I said.
He nodded his cat head up and down. Very weird to see, I can tell you - a cat nodding yes in
a thoughtful, normal way.
You're right.
The change back to human form was at least as strange as the change to cat. The fur
disappeared, leaving bare patches of pink skin behind. A nose grew out of the flat cat face.
The tail was sucked up like a snake going up a vacuum cleaner.
Tobias stood there, looking embarrassed. He quickly pulled on his clothes. "Maybe with
some practice we can figure out how to change back into our clothes."
"We?"
He smiled his gentle smile again. "Don't you get it yet, Jake? If I can do it, so can you."
I shook my head. "I don't think so, Tobias."
Suddenly he grew angry. He grabbed me by both my shoulders and actually shook me. "Don't
you understand, Jake? It's all true. All of it."
I pushed him away. I didn't want to hear it.
But he kept after me. "Jake, it's all true. The Andalite gave us these powers for a reason."
"Fine," I snapped. "You use them."
"I will," he said. "But we'll need you, Jake. You most of all."
30
"Why me?"
He hesitated. "Geez, Jake, don't you understand? I know what I can do and what I can't do. I
can't make plans and tell people what to do. I'm not the leader. You are."
I laughed rudely. "I'm not the leader of anything."
He just looked at me with those deep, troubled eyes - eyes I can now see only in my memory.
"Yes, Jake, you are our leader. You are the one who can bring us all together and help us
defeat the Controllers. We have the ability to be much more than we are, to have the stealth
of a cat, and... and the eyes of eagles, and the sense of smell of a dog, and... and the speed
of a horse or a cheetah. We're going to need it all, if we have any hope of holding out against
the Controllers,"
I wanted it not to be true. I wanted none of it to be true.
But I knew that it was.
I nodded slowly. It felt like I was agreeing to something awful. Like I was volunteering for a
trip to the dentist or something much worse. It felt like a million pounds of weight had just
landed on my shoulders.
I knew what I had to do next.
"Well," I said grimly. "I guess I'd better go find Homer."
Homer. That's my dog.
31
CHAPTER 9
It isn't painful. Morphing, I mean.
I petted Homer for a while, feeling like a complete and total fool. "This is the stupidest thing
I have ever done," I told Tobias.
"Look, you have to concentrate. At least, I did, I mean, I formed this mental picture of Dude,
right? I thought about becoming him."
"I see. So I have to, like, meditate on becoming a dog."
"That's right. You have to think about it. You have to want it."
Normally I would have figured he was nuts. But I had just seen him turn into a cat. So if he
was nuts, so was I.
I thought about becoming Homer. As I stroked his fur I formed a picture in my mind of me
becoming Homer. Homer became weirdly quiet while I did it. Like he was asleep, only his
eyes were open.
"Just like Dude," Tobias commented. "I think the process kind of puts the animal in a trance
or something."
"He's just scared because he thinks his master is a looney tune." I continued stroking Homer's
fur and concentrating, and Homer continued to lie very still. "Okay, now what?" I asked
Tobias.
"Now we better put Homer outside. He might get slightly freaked by watching you turn into
him."
It took Homer about ten seconds to come out of his trance. But then he jumped up, normal,
hyperactive Homer again. I put him outside in the yard.
Tobias was sitting patiently when I got back, just waiting. "Give it a try," he urged me.
"Think about it. Want it."
I took a deep breath. I closed my eyes. I recalled the picture of Homer I'd formed in my mind.
I thought about becoming Homer.
I opened my eyes. "Bow wow," I said, laughing. "Guess it didn't work for me, Tobias."
The back of my hand itched and I scratched it.
"Jake?" Tobias said.
"What?"
"Look at your hand."
I looked at my hand. It was covered with orange fur.
32
I jumped about a foot, straight up in the air. "Ohh! Ohh!" I stared at my hand. The fur had
stopped growing.
"Don't be scared," Tobias advised, "Go with it. Now you've stopped the morph. You have to
concentrate."
"My hand!" I said. "Fur!"
"Yeah, and your ears... " Tobias said.
I ran to the mirror over my dresser. My ears had moved. They had slid up the side of my
head, and were definitely larger than they should be.
"Go on, it's so cool!" Tobias said.
"Cool? It's... it's... creepy. It's weird. It's... I mean, look at my hands! I have fur!"
"You have to do this," Tobias said.
"I don't have to do anything," I said sullenly.
Tobias nodded. "Okay, you're right. You don't have to do this. You can just forget what we
saw last night. And forget what we know. And as the Yeerks take over more and more
people, you can just ignore it. We can all just go along and grow up in a world where human
beings are nothing but bodies to be used by murdering aliens."
Okay, when he put it that way it didn't sound like a great option.
"Come on," Tobias urged.
I swallowed hard. I closed my eyes. I thought of Homer. Of being Homer.
I felt the itch mess again, and when I opened my eyes, there was fur growing on my arms.
And fur growing out of my face. And fur curling up from under my collar. My legs itched
and I realized they were growing fur, too. My bones... well, they didn't exactly hurt, but
they did feel very strange. You know when you go to the dentist and he gives you Novocaine
so the drill doesn't really hurt, but you know it should hurt? I guess that's what it's like.
My bones shortened. I could feel my backbone stretching as it extended out into a tail. There
was a scraping sound as my knees suddenly reversed direction. I toppled forward, no longer
able to walk upright.
When my hands hit the floor they weren't exactly hands anymore. The fingers were gone. All
that was left were short, stubby nails.
My face bulged out. My eyes drew closer together.
Tobias got up and tilted the mirror down so I could see myself.
I watched the final transformation as the last patches of my pink human flesh disappeared.
And the tail - my tail - sprouted to its full length.
33
I was a dog. It was insane. But just the same. I was a dog.
I knew I should be scared by all this, only I wasn't. I was ecstatic. I was giddy. I was thrilled.
Happiness just washed over me, Happiness filled me up.
I breathed in through my ridiculously long nose and wow! Wow! The smells. Oh, man, you
have no idea! I breathed in and right away I knew my mom was toasting a waffle in the
kitchen. And I knew Tobias had walked through the territory of a big male dog. And I knew
things I couldn't even explain in human words. It was like being blind all your life and then
suddenly you can see.
I ran over to Tobias and sniffed his shoe. I wanted a better idea of who that big male dog was.
From the scent of his urine picked up by Tobias's shoe I got a sort of picture of him. See,
Homer knew him. His owners called him Streak. He was neutered, like me. He spent most of
his time in his yard, but he broke out sometimes by digging under his fence. He got a mix of
canned and dry food, Purina. No table scraps, unlike me.
All this information made me happy all over again, and I had to wag my tail. I looked up at
Tobias. He looked tall and strange and not very colorful, I wasn't all that interested in looking
at stuff. Smelling things was way better.
INTRUDER!
There was a noise in the yard. A dog! An unknown dog in MY yard. An INTRUDER!
I ran to the window and perched against it and cut loose.
"Rrrawf! Rrawf rrawf! rrawfrrawfrrawfrrawf!"
I barked as loud as I could. No WAY some unknown dog was just going to walk through MY
yard.
"Jake, get a grip," Tobias said. "That's Homer out there."
Homer? What? But I was...
I tucked my tail between my legs. What was going on?
"Jake, listen to me," Tobias said. "It's just what happened to me when I morphed into a cat.
The dog brain is part of your brain now. You have to deal with it."
But... there's a dog in MY yard.
"That's Homer, Jake. You are Jake. You're just in a body copied from Homer's DNA. That's
the real Homer out there. You put him out there. Focus. You are Jake. Jake."
I took several deep breaths. The smells! Oh, boy, there was this one smell I couldn't quite -
Focus, Jake! I ordered myself. Focus!
Slowly I calmed the dog part of my mind.
34
Let go of the smells. Let go of the sound of a dog out in your yard.
It wasn't easy, that first time. Being a dog is so completely amazing. For one thing, there's
nothing halfway about it. You're never sort of happy. You're HAPPY! You're never sort of
bummed. You're totally, completely bummed. And boy, when you get hungry in dog form,
you are nuts on the subject of food.
There was a knock on my bedroom door. Yes, my bedroom door. I knew who I was again. I
was Jake. Jake with four legs, a tail and a snout, but Jake.
The knocking seemed incredibly loud to my dog ears.
"Jake, you got Homer in there with you?" My brother Tom's voice. "Mom's on the phone,
stop him yapping - "
He opened the door and stepped in. He looked around, confused.
"Who are you?" he demanded of Tobias.
"I'm Tobias. I'm a friend of Jake's."
"Well, where is he?"
"Oh... he's around," Tobias said.
Tom looked down at me. There was a strange smell about him. My dog brain couldn't quite
identify it. It was an unsettling, dangerous smell. And somehow, in my own mind, I heard the
echo of a laugh. A very human laugh I had heard the night before as Visser Three swallowed
the Andalite whole.
"Bad dog," Tom said to me. "You keep quiet. Bad dog." And then he left.
I was devastated. I wasn't a bad dog. Not really. I was just barking because some other dog
was in MY yard. Bad dog? I was a bad dog? No, I wanted to be a good dog. I crept into the
corner, utterly miserable.
Tobias knelt down and patted my head.
When he scratched me behind the ears, I felt a little better.
35
CHAPTER 10
I called all the others on the phone after I got done morphing back into my normal body.
Tobias took off on his own, saying he'd hook up with us later at Cassie's farm. I was on the
kitchen phone with Cassie when Tom came in.
"Oh, there you are," he said.
I covered the mouthpiece. "Yeah. Tobias said you were looking for me before."
"I just wanted you to shut your dog up," Tom said. He turned a chair around backward and
straddled it.
I hesitated. For some reason I didn't want to talk to Cassie with Tom listening in. "I'll just see
you there in a couple hours, okay?" I told Cassie. I hung up.
I looked over at Tom. He's bigger than me, even though I'm not exactly small. His hair is
darker, almost black, while mine is brown.
I had always trusted him. He wasn't like a lot of guys who pound on their younger brother.
We were always kind of close. At least, until the last year or so. Somehow we just weren't
spending as much time together. Partly it was that he was involved in this club called The
Sharing. They did all this stuff together, so he was busy a lot of the time.
The thing is, Tom should have been the very first person I told about all the stuff that had
happened. But as I was sitting there watching him munch toast, I just had this feeling. This
feeling that said No, this has to be a secret. Even from Tom.
Instead I told him the other thing I was afraid to tell him.
"I, uh... I didn't make the team," I said.
"What team?" he asked. He looked puzzled.
"What team? The basketball team. Your old team."
"Oh. Too bad," he said.
"Too bad?" I repeated. I could not believe how little he seemed to care.
"It's just sports," he said. He munched another big bite of toast.
"Just sports?" I couldn't stop repeating what he said. Tom, saying sports were no big deal? No
way. He lived for sports. "Yeah, I guess I just don't have your total skill."
He shrugged. "Well, I quit the team, anyway. A couple days ago."
I practically fell off my chair. "You quit! You quit the team? And you didn't even talk to me
about it? What's the deal?"
"I didn't say anything because I knew you and Dad would make a big thing of it. Look, there
are more important things than throwing balls through hoops," he said. He had this
36
mysterious look in his eyes. I figured he meant girls were the more important thing. "Besides,
" he added, "we do much cooler stuff at The Sharing. Maybe you should join up."
I was stunned. Obviously, Tom and I were further apart than I had realized.
When we were done talking, I headed outside to mow the lawn. I mow the lawn every
Saturday. It's my major chore. That, and taking out the trash, which I hate, because we have
to do all this recycling stuff.
When I was finally done mowing and trimming and raking, I hopped on my bike and took
off.
I had arranged with everyone to hook up at Cassie's farm. It isn't exactly a normal farm,
although it had been in the old days. And they do still have horses and a cow. But now the
big red main barn is the Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic. Cassie's father runs it. They take in
any kind of injured animal except pet-type animals, There are always lots of birds, along with
squirrels and deer and skunks and so on. Sometimes they get a bobcat or a fox or even a wolf.
Cassie's mom is a vet, too, but she works at The Gardens. That's this huge amusement park
that also has a zoo - or I guess they call it a wildlife park. Luckily, Cassie really loves
animals. It would have been hard, having her parents, if she didn't really love animals.
Me, I have a dog. Tobias has a cat. Cassie has everything from porcupines to polar bears.
By the time I got there, Marco, Tobias, and Rachel were already waiting outside the barn.
Rachel had her face turned up to catch the tanning rays of the sun. Cassie wasn't there yet. I
figured she was doing chores. She had tons of work to do around there.
"Hey, guys," I said.
Rachel opened her eyes and immediately thrust a newspaper at me. "Look," she said, pointing
to an article.
I started to read the article. It wasn't very long. It said that police claimed there had been a
disturbance in the construction site the night before. It said several people had called,
claiming they'd seen flying saucers landing there, followed by bright lights.
"Cool," I said, looking up. "So the cops know about it now. That's a relief."
"Keep reading," Rachel said.
The article went on to say that the police had arrived on the scene and found a group of
teenagers playing with fireworks. The teenagers had run away. Fireworks were discovered at
the scene.
The police spokesman had laughed at the reports of flying saucers. "It was just a bunch of
kids playing where they shouldn't have been," he said. "There were definitely no flying
saucers. People shouldn't be so quick to believe nonsense."
"But this is a total lie," I said.
37
"Ding ding ding ding! Correct answer. Johnny, tell our contestant what he's won," Marco
said.
"Did you see the last part?" Rachel pressed.
I read the last sentence. It froze me up good, I can tell you. Police were offering a reward for
information on the teenagers.
"They're looking for us," Marco said.
"Why would the police be... I mean, why would they lie?" I wondered aloud. But the
answer was pretty obvious.
Marco laughed his sardonic laugh. "Let's see, Captain Brilliant - would it be because the cops
are Controllers?"
"Probably not all the cops," Tobias pointed out.
"If the police have been infiltrated by the Controllers, who knows how many others have,
too?" Rachel asked. "Teachers? People in the government? The newspapers and the TV?"
"Math teachers, for sure," Marco joked.
We all looked around nervously, like we expected to find ourselves surrounded by
Controllers.
"I tried to tell myself it was all a dream," Rachel said.
"Been there," I said.
For a while no one said anything. We all felt the same terrible feeling - like we were all
alone.
Like suddenly we were dealing with stuff that was way, way, way over our heads.
Marco spoke first. "Look, why do we have to deal with this? I say we just forget it. We never
talk about it. We never morph. We just deal with our own lives."
Tobias and Rachel both looked at me. They were waiting for me to argue with Marco.
"Marco, I halfway agree with you - " I started to say.
Suddenly Marco just went ballistic. "We could get killed!" he yelled. "Don't you get it? You
saw what happened to the Andalite. I mean, this is radical stuff, Jake. This is for real. Real!
We could all get killed."
Tobias was looking at Marco with this sideways look, like he thought maybe Marco was
some kind of coward. I knew better. Marco had his reasons.
Marco shook his head. In a quiet voice he said, "Look, I think these Controllers are jerks. But
if something happened to me... my dad. He wouldn't be able to handle it."
38
Two years ago, Marco's mom died. She drowned. They never even found her body. Marco's
dad lost it big time. He totally fell apart. He quit his job as an industrial engineer because he
couldn't handle being around other people. Now he was working as a night janitor, making
barely enough to support Marco. He spent his days sleeping or watching TV with the sound
off.
"You can all think I'm a weasel if you want," Marco said. "I don't care. But if I get killed or
something, my dad will flat-out die. He's only hanging in there because of me."
I wondered if I should go pat him on the back or something. But if I had, Marco, being
Marco, would have just said something sarcastic.
"There's Cassie," Rachel said, shielding her eyes and looking off across the open field.
A horse, galloping across the green. Its black mane was flying in the warm breeze. I didn't
see any rider.
The horse slowed, trotting closer, and suddenly I had a strange feeling about the horse.
"Cassie and I have been here for a while," Rachel said by way of explanation. "She's really
good at this. Look how fast she can do it."
The horse nickered softly. Then the animal began to melt. The big brown eyes became
slightly smaller. The long muzzle became a human mouth,
A thing that was part horse and part Cassie smiled at us with big horse teeth and said, "Hey,
kids."
Marco suddenly sat down. Very hard. He had never seen a morphing.
"It's cool," I said, trying to sound very relaxed. "It's just Cassie."
I decided I'd better be a gentleman and look away. After all, when Tobias and I had morphed,
we'd kind of morphed right out of our clothes. But I noticed that as Cassie emerged from the
horse she was wearing a skintight blue outfit. One of those outfits girls wear to do aerobics.
I watched and saw something beautiful happen. For just a few seconds, she stayed half-horse
and half-human. She reminded me of the Andalite. I realized it was deliberate. Cassie was
controlling the way she morphed.
"Jeez, Rachel," I said. "You're right. Cassie is good."
Suddenly we heard the sound of tires on gravel.
We all spun around. Down the gravel and dirt road came a single black-and-white car.
"The cops!" Tobias cried.
39
CHAPTER 11
"Cassie. Morph. Now!" I snapped. The police car was coming fast. "We do not want to have
to explain a half-horse half-person."
"Which way should I morph?" Cassie wailed. "Horse or human?" She reared up slightly on
her hind legs.
I knew what was happening. She was fighting the horse's urge to panic.
"Human, human, human!" I said. "Everybody, stand in front of her!"
The police car squealed to a stop, sending the gravel flying. A single policeman stepped out.
I waved at him.
"Morning," he said. "You kids, uh... hiding something?"
I wanted to look over my shoulder and see what kind of shape Cassie was in. But that would
have been a mistake. "Hiding something?" I repeated.
"Step aside, all of you," he ordered.
We did, revealing Cassie. Fully human.
The policeman looked puzzled. But then he shrugged.
I breathed a huge sigh of relief.
"Can we help you, officer?" Rachel asked in her best "responsible" voice.
"We're making some inquiries," he said, still looking at Cassie like something must be wrong
with her. "We're looking for some kids who were shooting off fireworks in the construction
site across from the mall last night."
Suddenly Marco started coughing.
"Something the matter with him?" the policeman asked.
"Nope," I said. "Nothing wrong with him."
"We want these kids," the policeman said. "We want them real bad. See, it was dangerous
what they did. Could have been someone hurt. So we want to find the kids."
Suddenly I knew. He was one of them. The policeman was a Controller. I looked at his face.
It seemed normal. But inside his head was a creature from another planet - an evil, parasitic
slug. Just behind those normal, human-looking eyes, something vile lurked.
"I don't know anything about it," I lied.
He looked at me real close, and I began to sweat.
40
"Hey, you know what?" he said. "You look familiar. You look like a young man I know
named Tom."
"He's my brother," I said. I was trying not to let my voice go weird. But I just couldn't forget
the fact that it wasn't really some normal, human cop I was talking to. It was a Yeerk. This
wasn't even a human anymore. Not really. It was a Human-Controller. The human brain was
totally enslaved.
"Tom's your brother, eh? Well, he's a good kid. I know him from The Sharing. I'm one of the
adult supervisors. Great group, The Sharing. You should come to a meeting."
"Yeah, um, Tom invited me already," I said.
"We have a lot of fun."
"Yeah," I repeated,
"Well, you call me if you hear anything about these kids in the construction site. I should
warn you - they may come up with some wild story to conceal their guilt. But you're too
smart to believe a bunch of crazy lies, aren't you?"
"He's a regular genius," Marco said.
Finally the policeman took off.
"Okay, rule number one," Rachel announced firmly. "We don't do anything to attract
attention. We have to be secret about everything. Especially morphing."
Cassie looked embarrassed. "Yeah, it was stupid of me. It's just, man! It is so amazing,
running like that. Out in the open spaces, running and running."
"How did you manage to morph with clothing?" I asked. "When Tobias and I did it... well,
let's just say it's a good thing neither of you girls was around."
"It took some practice," Cassie said, "And it can only be tight clothing. I tried it with a coat
on. It got shredded. J don't know what we'll do in the winter."
"That's not going to be a problem," Marco said firmly. "Because there isn't going to be any
more morphing."
"Maybe Marco is right," Rachel said. "This is too big for us. We're just kids. We need to find
someone important to tell this to. Someone we can trust,"
"We can't trust anyone," Tobias said flatly. "Anyone could be a Controller. We tell the wrong
person, we are all dead. And the whole world will be doomed."
"I don't want to stop morphing," Cassie said. "Do you realize all we could do with this
power? We could communicate with animals, maybe. Help save endangered species,"
"Humans may be the next endangered species, Cassie," Tobias said quietly.
41
"What do you say, Jake?" Cassie asked.
"Me?" I shrugged. "I don't know. Marco's right, we could all get killed. Rachel's right, this is
too major for a bunch of kids." I hesitated. I didn't like what I was about to say. "But Tobias
is right, too. I mean, the whole world is in danger. And we can't trust anyone."
"So, what do we do?" Rachel demanded.
"Hey, it's not up to me to decide," I said hotly.
"Let's take a vote," Rachel said.
"I vote we try to live long enough to get driver's licenses," Marco said.
"I vote we do what the Andalite said - fight," Tobias said.
"You've never even been in a fight," Marco sneered. "You can't handle the punks at school.
Suddenly now you want to kick butt on that Visser Three freakazoid?"
Tobias said nothing, but a blush spread up his neck.
"I vote with Tobias," Rachel said, giving Marco a dirty look. "I wish we could dump all this
on someone else. But we can't."
"Let's think it over for a while," Cassie said. "This is a big decision. I mean, it's not like we're
deciding whether to wear jeans or a skirt."
I was relieved. Thank goodness for Cassie.
"Yeah, let's wait for a while," t agreed. "In the meantime, no one say anything to anyone. We
just go back to normal life."
There was a smirk on Marco's face. He thought he'd won. But I wasn't so sure. Tobias was
still blushing. He sent a secret, grateful look to Rachel.
Marco and I took off toward my house again, trying to act normal. We talked about the
baseball season. We talked about who was going to slaughter who in Dead Zone 5, which is
this CD game we were going to play on my computer.
By the time we'd reached my house, we'd run out of stuff to talk about.
We played Dead Zone for a while. Neither of us did very well. Face it, games just weren't all
that interesting anymore. My mind was totally not there.
Tom came in after a while. "Hey, you guys," he said. "Can t give that a try?"
It had been months since Tom had done anything with me like play a game.
"Sure." Marco moved over and gave Tom his control stick.
42
We played for a few minutes, and Tom did pretty well. But then it was like he got bored or
something. He gave the control back to Marco and just sat back and watched.
"You guys hear about all the stuff going on with the construction site last night?" he asked
me.
Marco jerked in surprise.
"What stuff?" I said.
"It was in the newspaper," Tom said casually. "They said some kids were there shooting off
fireworks. A bunch of morons who live around there decided it was flying saucers or
something."
He laughed. "Flying saucers, right."
Marco and I both laughed, too.
"Yeah. And it was just these kids playing with fireworks," Tom said.
"Uh-huh," I said. I was trying very hard to concentrate on the game.
"You were out at the mall last night, weren't you?" Tom asked me.
"Uh-huh."
"Did you come back through the construction site?"
I shook my head. "No way."
"Didn't see any kids hanging around there, maybe?"
"Nope."
"It's not like I'd get them in trouble," Tom said. "I mean, I think it's kind of cool. They're just
shooting off fireworks and they get all these people terrified of flying saucers."
"Uh-huh."
"Flying saucers," he said. He laughed again. "Only complete dips believe that kind of stuff."
He leaned close. "You don't believe in that, do you? Aliens and spaceships and little green
men from Mars?"
I wanted to say no, none of them had been little or green. But I just said, "No way."
Tom nodded and stood up. "Cool. You know, Jake, I feel like we haven't been hanging
around much lately."
"I guess not," I agreed.
"That's too bad," he said. He snapped his fingers like he'd just had an idea. "You know, you
should join The Sharing. Marco, too."
43
"Why should we join?" Marco asked.
Tom just grinned. "I gotta go," he said. He gave me a playful punch on the shoulder. "Catch
you guys later. And don't forget - let me know if you hear anything about those kids at the
construction site."
He left.
Marco looked at me. "Jake. He's one of them."
"What?"
"Tom. Tom is one of them. Your brother is a Controller."
44
CHAPTER 12
I swung my fist and caught Marco in the side of the head.
He jumped back and I swung again. But Marco was quick. He dodged my second swing, and
I slipped and went down.
Marco snatched the bedspread off my bed, threw it over me to tangle up my arms, and sat on
me.
"Jake, quit acting like a stupid jerk," he said.
I was trying to grab him, but he had me pretty good. "Take that back!" I yelled.
"Not likely," Marco said. "You think it's just a coincidence he's suddenly all interested in
what happened at the construction site?"
I knew it looked bad. Even while I was struggling to get free and kick Marco's butt. I had this
sudden flash about the smell I'd noticed on Tom when I was morphed into a dog. And there
was that laugh I'd heard at the site.
But no. No! This was Tom, my big brother. Tom would never, ever have let those slimy
creeps into his head. Never.
"I'll let you up if you'll calm down," Marco said. "Look, maybe I'm wrong, okay?"
I stopped struggling, and Marco let me up.
"You have to admit, Jake, it doesn't look good."
"Tom is not one of them, okay? That's final," I said.
"Whatever," Marco said. "Just don't punch me again, 'cause I might have to hit you back."
Just then I heard this fluttering noise at my window. Like someone beating on it very softly. I
went to the window, followed by Marco.
There was a bird there. Some kind of huge bird like an eagle or a hawk, beating its wings
against the window.
Let me in, all right? I can't hover here forever!
Marco's eyes went wide. He'd heard it, too.
I opened the window and the bird flew straight in. It landed on my dresser. It was almost two
feet long, mostly brown, with gnarled talons and a sharp, hooked beak.
"It's some kind of eagle or something," Marco said.
A red-tailed hawk, actually, Tobias said.
45
"Is that you, Tobias?" Marco demanded. "I thought we weren't going to do any more of this
morphing."
I never agreed to that.
"Well, morph back, Tobias," I said. "You know what the Andalite said  never stay in any
form for more than two hours."
Tobias hesitated. He tilted his hawk's head and peered at me with an incredibly concentrated
gaze. At last, he hopped over onto my bed.
Let me tell you something, it is beyond weird, watching feathers turn into skin. The brown
feathers ran together and merged and turned pink. It was like the feathers were melting. Like
they had turned into wax and were being heated up.
The beak disappeared quickly, and lips grew out of it. The talons split into five and became
toes.
Halfway through the process of changing, Tobias was a lump, half pink, half brown, with
featherlike patterns still visible on his back and chest. His face was small and mostly human,
except that he still had those sharp, alert hawk's eyes. Two tiny, shriveled arms protruded
from the front of his chest with fingers like a baby's.
All in all, it was a pretty disgusting sight.
But the human DNA asserted itself over the hawk's and he became more normal. About three
minutes sifter he'd started the change, there was a completely normal Tobias, sitting naked on
the end of my bed.
"I haven't figured out how to morph clothes yet, like Cassie," he said sheepishly. "Can I
borrow some?"
I loaned him a pair of pants and a shirt, but my shoes were all the wrong size.
"That was the coolest thing I've ever done in my life," Tobias said. His whole face was
glowing. "I was riding the thermals."
"What's a thermal?" I asked.
"That's when there's warm air rising up from the ground. It forms this cushion under your
wings. You can just float up there. Like a mile up! You just surf the thermals. You guys have
got to do it! It is the best thing ever."
"Tobias, how on Earth did you do a hawk morph?" I demanded.
"There's an injured hawk right there in Cassie's barn," he said. "There's this cool osprey, too,
but I decided on the hawk."
"How did you fly if the hawk you morphed from was injured?" I wondered.
Marco shook his head pityingly. "Jake, do you pay any attention in biology class? DNA has
nothing to do with some injury. The DNA wasn't broken. Just a wing."
46
I ignored Marco. "You're lucky Cassie's dad didn't catch you," I said to Tobias.
"He's so depressed," Tobias commented.
"Who's depressed? Cassie's dad?"
"No, the hawk. I mean, I think he knows they aren't trying to hurt him or anything, but he
can't stand being cooped up there while his wing heals." Tobias's eyes darkened. "It's terrible
when birds have to be locked up in cages. They should be free."
"Yeah, free the birds," Marco commented sarcastically. "I'll get the bumper stickers printed
up."
"You wouldn't have that attitude if you'd been up there with me," Tobias said angrily. "It was
cool being a cat and all. But a hawk! It's just total, absolute freedom."
I hadn't ever seen Tobias so happy. I mean, Tobias has a pretty lousy home life. Thinking
about it, I suddenly had this feeling...
I repeated the warning. "No more than two hours in any morph, right? You keep track of the
time, right?"
Tobias smiled. "Yeah. I don't have a watch or anything, but with hawk eyes you can actually
see the hands of someone's watch when they're half a mile below you. It's like being
Superman. You
can fly, plus you have super vision."
"Now he's Superman," Marco muttered.
"I was looking around. I guess I thought I might be able to see something from the air,"
Tobias said. "I was looking for something that might be a Yeerk pool."
The phrase sounded vaguely familiar. I remembered Visser Three saying something about
"Yeerk pools." "What's a Yeerk pool?" I asked Tobias.
"It's where the Yeerks live in their natural state. Every three days a Yeerk has to leave his
host body and go into the Yeerk pool to soak up nutrients. Especially Kandrona rays."
Marco and I exchanged a suspicious look. Neither of us knew any of this,
"At the end," Tobias explained, "when the Andalite told us all to run for it, I stayed behind
for a few seconds, I guess maybe I was too scared even to run."
I shook my head. I knew better. Tobias just hadn't wanted to leave the Andalite alone, I think
maybe the Andalite meant even more to Tobias than to the rest of us.
"Anyway, he gave me... visions, I guess you'd call them. Pictures. Information. A lot of it,
all at once. All jumbled. I haven't even started to sort it all out. But I do know about the
Yeerk pools and the Kandrona."
47
Marco held up his hand, silencing Tobias. "Let me check the door," he said. He went to my
door and peeked out into the hallway. "All clear," he announced.
Tobias gave Marco a questioning took.
"Tom," Marco said. "He's one of them."
"Don't make me hurt you," I warned him angrily. ""Tom is not a Controller."
"Either way, we should be careful," Tobias said. He lowered his voice. "The Kandrona is a
device that produces Kandrona particles. See, it's like this little portable version of the
Yeerk's own home sun. The Yeerks need Kandrona particles to live, like a human needs
vitamins or whatever. The Kandrona particles are beamed from wherever the Kandrona is
and concentrated in the Yeerk pool. Once every three days, every Yeerk has to leave his host
and go into the pool. They soak up the particles and then they reenter the host body."
"What does this have to do with you flying around playing Superman?" I asked.
"Well, it seems dumb now, but I was thinking maybe I could see the Yeerk pool." He made a
rueful smile. "Saw a lot of swimming pools and some ponds. You get up there and you
realize there are ponds and lakes and streams everywhere. But I didn't see anything special."
"And what if you found some Yeerk pool? Then what?" Marco demanded.
"Then we'd blow it up," Tobias said.
"Wrong," Marco said. "We decided not to get into this."
"No, we decided not to decide yet," I said.
"Well, I've decided," Tobias said.
"Suddenly the wimp is a hero," Marco sneered.
This time Tobias didn't blush. "Maybe I just found something worth fighting for, Marco."
"You don't even fight for yourself," Marco said.
"That was before," Tobias said softly. "Before the Andalite. Before he died trying to save us.
I can't let that go. I can't let him die for nothing. So whatever you guys decide, I'm going to
fight."
48
CHAPTER 13
We find the Yeerk pool," Tobias said. "And when we do, we blow it up and kill every one of
those evil slugs."
I expected Marco to start yelling. But Marco is pretty smart. He could tell that Tobias had
reached me with his talk about the Andalite. So he just smiled, a little sneakily.
"Remember that cop today, the one who is so interested in finding whoever was at the
construction site? The cop who is probably a Controller?"
"What about him?" I said.
"Well, let's see. He invites you to join The Sharing. And now along comes Tom. And
suddenly he is very interested in whatever happened at the construction site. And guess what?
Tom also invites you to join The Sharing."
Tobias nodded in agreement. "Maybe this Sharing is an organization for Controllers."
Marco smiled. He's my best friend and all, but sometimes Marco really makes me mad.
"We're pretty sure the cop is a Controller. And I don't care what you say, Jake, I think Tom is,
too. So, here's the deal. You want to get into this fight against the Yeerks?" Marco asked me.
"Fine. Let's see how much you want to do it when it turns out it's your own brother you have
to destroy."
That stopped me cold.
"It's not exactly some video game, is it?" Marco said. "This is reality. You don't know
anything about reality, Jake. Nothing bad has ever really happened to you. You have this
perfect family. Like I used to have."
His voice cracked a little. He never talked about his mom's death.
I realized he was right. I didn't know about reality. Not the way reality had happened to
Marco  and to Tobias.
"So maybe we just walk away from this," Marco said. "Let someone else fight this fight.
Sorry about the Andalite, but I've got enough death in my family."
"No," I said, surprising myself. "The Andalite gave us the morphing power for a reason. It
wasn't just for the fun of being a dog or a horse or a bird. He hoped we would fight."
"Then maybe Tom is the enemy," Marco said. "Maybe it's your own brother you'll end up
destroying."
"Yes," I said. My throat felt all tight. "Maybe that's what will happen. Maybe not. But the
first step is to find out more. And I think maybe the way to do that is to check out this
meeting of The Sharing. Tonight. I'll call the others. Anyone wants to come, cool. You want
to stay out of it, Marco, that's cool, too."
49
He hesitated. He sent Tobias an angry look. But he said, "Okay, it's just a meeting, right? We
go and see. I'm in for that,"
I called the others. Rachel agreed quickly. Cassie had to think about it for a little while, but
she agreed, too.
I told Tom we were interested in attending the meeting. Me and Marco and Rachel and
Cassie. We'd already decided Tobias would be there, too. Only in a different way.
"Tonight's a great meeting to come to," Tom said enthusiastically. "We're having a bonfire on
the beach. You know, hanging out, playing games, and stuff. We play night volleyball, which
is so funny because half the time guys can't even see the ball. It's great. It's the best
organization. You'll love it."
Listening to him, it sure didn't sound like The Sharing was connected with the Yeerks. You
couldn't really picture Visser Three or a bunch of Taxxons playing volleyball.
I was thinking maybe we were all just nuts. The Sharing was probably just like some new
kind of coed Boy Scouts or something.
It wasn't that far to the beach, so we decided not to drive there with Tom. We walked. Tobias
walked part way with us, then he stepped behind a dark dune as we got close to the shore. A
few minutes later we saw a hawk take flight. There aren't many thermals at night, so he had
to work to get altitude. But then I guess he found a decent enough updraft, because he soared
up and away till he disappeared.
"I have got to try that," Cassie said. "It looks wonderful."
"Yeah," I agreed. Ahead, the bonfire burned bright on the dark beach. People were all around
it, playing, talking, eating. Kids from school. Adults. People I didn't know. Others I did.
Were they all Controllers? I wondered. How could I ever know? And was my own brother
one of them?
After about an hour of hanging out there on the beach, I was sure I was nuts. There was no
way these guys were aliens. We played some volleyball, me and Tom together on one team.
We ate the barbecue ribs they had. I mean, it was just like this normal, good time.
The sand was still warm. The night air was chilly, but near the fire it was nice.
"Now you see why I enjoy this?" Tom asked me.
"It's cool," I said. I looked around at all the people having fun. "I didn't realize it was so much
fun,"
"Well, that's not all it is," Tom said. "I mean, it's more than just fun. The Sharing can do all
kinds of things for you. Once you're a full member."
"How do you get to be a full member?" I asked.
50
He smiled mysteriously. "Oh, that will come later. First you become an associate member.
Later the leaders will decide whether to ask you to become a full member. Once you become
a full member... the whole world changes."
At that moment, something weird happened. I was looking at Tom, and he was smiling at me.
But then his face kind of twitched. His head started to pull to one side, like he was trying to
shake his head only he couldn't quite do it. For just a split second there was a look in his eyes
 scared or... or something. He was looking right at me, and it was like some different
person, some scared person, was looking out of those same eyes.
Then he was back to normal. Or what looked like normal.
"I have to go for a while now," he said. "The full members have a separate meeting. You
guys stay here and have fun. Have some more of that barbecue. It's great, isn't it?"
With that, he was gone into the night.
I felt like I had swallowed barbed wire.
Marco and Cassie came over. They had just finished playing Frisbee in the surf with some
other kids. Marco was laughing.
"Okay," he said, "I admit it. I was wrong. These are just normal people having a good time.
And Tom is not a Controller."
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry. Marco was wrong.
I knew what I had seen in Tom's eyes  he was trying to warn me. Somehow he had
managed to gain control of his face for just a second before the Yeerk in his head had crushed
him.
Tom  the real Tom, not the Yeerk slug in his brain  had tried to warn me.
51
CHAPTER 14
"They're all going off to a separate meeting," I said. "All the full members. I'd sure like to
know what goes on in that meeting." I struggled to sound normal, but my insides were
churning.
"I saw people heading that way." Rachel pointed.
"Let's see if we can get close," I said.
"What's going on?" Marco asked. "I thought we just decided everything was normal here."
It was Cassie who answered him. "Nothing is normal here," she said. "Can't you feel it?" She
shivered. "All these so-called full members, they're all being so perfectly nice. So perfectly
helpful. They're so perfectly normal it's abnormal. And all the time their eyes are following
you, watching you. Watching you like... like a hungry dog watching a bone."
"Creepy," Rachel agreed. "Like if you took cheerleaders, combined them with gym teachers,
and made them all drink ten cups of coffee."
"They are all just a little too happy, aren't they?" Marco admitted. "People keep telling me
how all their problems disappeared once they became a full member of The Sharing. It's like
some cult or something."
"I'm getting into that secret meeting," I said. I had to know. I had to be dead sure. "Let's get
away from the fire. Over behind that lifeguard stand."
"How are you going to get into the meeting?" Marco asked.
"They won't worry about some stray dog that's walking along the beach," I said.
"Some stray... oh," Marco said.
"Good idea," Cassie said. "I'd do it, too, but the only morph I can do is a horse. They would
notice a horse."
I checked to see that no one could see us. I waved over my head. A few seconds later, Tobias
came swooping silently out of the starlit sky. He landed on the lifeguard stand,
What's up?
"The full members are off in some private get-together," I told him. "Do you know where
they are?"
Of course. With these eyes I can see the mice scampering through the dune grass. Nice,
plump, tasty-looking things.
"Tobias! Get a grip. Don't start eating mice just because you're in a hawk's body. What's
next? Road kill?"
He didn't say anything. Maybe he was offended at my suggestion that he would ever eat road
kill. Or, worse, maybe he wasn't offended.
52
"Where are the full members?" I asked.
About a hundred yards down the beach. There's a little bowl-like area formed by the dunes.
There are people posted all around, though, like guards.
I nodded. "Good job. Tobias, you've been in that body for more than an hour. You need to
morph back."
No, I'll keep watch from above for a while longer, he said.
"No, Tobias," I said sharply. "You need to morph back. You've done what we needed you to
do."
Um, there is that little problem... I don't exactly have any clothes on.
"Marco has your clothes in a bag. Rachel and Cassie will turn away while you morph."
Cassie grinned. "I am going to have to teach you boys how to morph clothing."
Still Tobias hesitated. I hate changing back. It's like going back into a prison or something. I
hate it when I don't have wings.
"Tobias, you can always return to your hawk morph later," Rachel reassured him. "Now,
come on, both of you. I'll look the other way so your delicate boy modesty isn't offended."
I took a deep breath. It was only my second morph. It still seemed totally ridiculous that I
was even thinking about becoming a dog. But as I concentrated, I could begin to feel the
itchiness and the squirmy feeling as Homer's DMA combined with the Andalite's technology
and began to change me.
At the same time, I could see fingers growing from the ends of Tobias's wings.
"Keep a grip on your human side," Cassie warned me. "We can't have you off chasing cats or
whatever. You need to focus hard on staying in control."
I started to say, "Yes, I know," but it came out "Rowr, rowwr, ruff!" I was already too
changed to make normal human speech.
I thought my answer instead. Yes, I know, Cassie. Don't worry.
"But I do worry," she said softly.
I nuzzled her hand with my cold nose and she patted my head. I set off across the sand.
Cassie had been right to warn me. The dunes, the surf, the low chirping of sea birds in their
hidden nests  all of it was so perfect for distracting my dog mind.
I heard something breathing in the sea grass, and then it broke and ran! I was off after it
before I could even think. It ran and I chased. I think it may have been a chipmunk or
something. I never could be sure, because it found a hole and went diving in.
53
I dug frantically in the sand for a while before my human brain realized, whoa, Jake this is
not what you're supposed to be doing. Stop it!
I made myself walk toward the meeting. I could hear the murmur of voices. I started to creep
closer, then I realized that was dumb. Dogs don't creep around. They just walk or run. If I
went around acting like "spy dog," that would make people pay attention.
So I wandered along, like any dog out for an evening stroll along the beach. My tongue lolled
out of my mouth. My tail wagged occasionally. The only thing I had to be careful of was not
to let Tom see me too clearly. After all, I looked exactly like Homer.
Basically, I was Homer.
I approached the edge of the area. There were high dunes all around. About twenty or thirty
people were standing together. Unfortunately, with my weak dog eyes I couldn't see them
very well in the darkness.
But I could hear them. I could hear them amazingly well. Sounds that I would barely have
noticed with my human hearing were as loud as a boom box set on nine.
And I could smell. It's funny about smell. As a human you don't really get into it. But when I
laid back and let my dog abilities come up, smell became as good as sight. Different, but just
as good for some things.
I heard Tom's voice. And I smelled a subtle combination of things that meant he was not too
far away.
There was a man on guard, but all he did was look down at me, then look away. No one cares
about a stray dog.
I was beginning to realize why the Andalite had given us the power to morph. There are
things you can do as an animal that you could never do as a human.
The members all seemed to be waiting for someone to arrive. I heard Tom say, "He should be
here soon. Wait, here he comes."
There was a stirring, muttering sound. I heard footsteps approach. I moved closer but stayed
out of the light.
"Everyone, quiet. We have problems," the voice said.
The voice! I knew that voice. It was the same voice that had been at that construction site. It
was the voice that had said, "Just save the head. Bring that to me, and we can identify it."
I crept a little closer. I had to look hard to see him with my dog sight But then, when he
turned just the right way, I saw him, I recognized him. It was someone I knew. Someone I
saw every day at school.
None other than Assistant Principal Chapman.
My assistant principal was a Controller.
54
"Item one. We still have not found the brats who were at the construction site," Chapman
said. His voice was hard. "I want them found. Visser Three wants them found. Does anyone
have any clues?"
For a moment no one spoke. Then I heard a second familiar voice.
"It could have been anyone," Tom said. "But it might be the one who's my brother, Jake. I
know he goes through the construction site sometimes. That's why I brought him here
tonight. So we could either make him ours... or kill him."
55
CHAPTER 15
Either make him ours... or kill him.
I felt like someone had punched me.
I told myself that Tom was a Human-Controller. Some slimy, snotty slug from another planet
was in his brain controlling him. When he talked to me it wasn't even Tom, not really. It was
a Yeerk,
My brother... one of them. Chapman... one of them.
They were everywhere. Everywhere! How were we going to stop them? How could we even
try? If they could take my own brother from me, if they could take Torn, then how was I
going to be able to stop them? It was insane. Marco was right.
I think if I had been fully human right then, despair would have just overpowered me. But
dogs don't know about despair. It was Homer's simple, happy, hopeful mind that saved me.
For a while I just sort of let go and drifted into dog consciousness. I didn't want to think. J
didn't want to be a human being. For a while t just wandered around the dunes and smelled
things.
But I knew I had a job to do. After a while I let go of the simple happiness of the dog and
forced myself back into painful reality.
I waited and listened some more to the meeting. But I was still so upset I didn't really track
on a lot of what was being said. I just kept hearing it over and over in my head  "Make him
ours... or kill him."
The one other thing that did stick in my mind was Tom discussing with some other guy 
some other Controller  the schedule for going to the Yeerk pool. He'd just been and was
feeling good, he said. He'd be heading back on Monday night.
That was the slug in his head talking. The Yeerk that controlled Tom needed to return to the
Yeerk pool.
Then I heard another voice. Cassie!
I slunk quickly around the back of a dune to get closer. But I could hear clearly. Cassie's
voice, and another voice it took me a minute to recognize.
It was the policeman. The same policeman.
"Hey, what are you doing back here?" the policeman demanded.
"I was just looking for shells," Cassie said.
"This is just for full members," the policeman said gruffly. "Private business. You
understand?"
"Yes, sir," Cassie said in her most humble voice.
56
I got to where I could see them, although I have to tell you, dog sight is not exactly great.
Everything is like an old TV with bad color and all blurry.
The policeman was staring hard at Cassie. Cassie was trying to be brave, but I could smell
the fact that she was afraid.
"Okay, take off," the policeman said at last. "But I have my eye on you. Get back with the
others."
Cassie turned and headed away as fast as she could walk. I caught up with her. I guess seeing
a dog come bounding out of nowhere startled her, because she jumped.
"Oh, it's you," she said.
Yeah. That was close. What were you doing there?
She shrugged. "Just wanted to make sure you were okay."
I was safer than you were, I pointed out.
We got back to the spot where Rachel, Marco, and Tobias were waiting. I didn't even want to
morph back into my human body. I knew that I could just let myself go again, and in a few
minutes my dog brain would forget why my human brain was sad. If someone would just
throw a stick out into the surf I could go after it. The water would make me happy. The
chasing would make me happy.
Now I knew why Tobias was so reluctant to leave his hawk's body. Being an animal could be
a nice way to escape from all your troubles.
I began to morph back into my own body. Cassie and Rachel turned and looked out toward
the water.
When I was completely myself again, I said, "Marco, you were right. Tom is a Controller,"
Marco did not look pleased about being right.
I told them what Tom had said to Chapman about bringing me to the meeting to either use me
or kill me.
"Wait a minute. Chapman is one of them, too?" Rachel asked. "Our Chapman? Mr. Chapman
the assistant principal?"
"I think he's some kind of a leader," I said. "It was him the other night at the construction site.
He was the one who told the Hork-Bajir just to keep the head."
"That is so Chapman," Marco said.
"I suggest we get the heck out of here," Tobias said.
57
"No, it's okay," I said. "Chapman told Tom there was not to be any killing at a Sharing
meeting. They don't want any suspicious activities. He also said they couldn't just go around
killing every kid who might have been at the construction site. They needed to be sure."
"That's decent of them," Rachel said dryly.
"Not really. Chapman just said that for a while longer they still have to avoid attracting too
much attention. A bunch of kids start turning up dead and people will definitely notice. He
said they should just wait  kids can't keep quiet for long about seeing aliens. When the kids
talk, the Controllers will find them and get rid of them."
"Except that we aren't going to talk about what we saw," Rachel said.
"You got that right," Marco agreed. "We aren't saying anything. We are forgetting everything
we saw. We are getting on with our normal lives."
"And leave Tom the way he is?" I demanded. "No way. Never. He's my brother. I'm going to
save him."
"Just how do you figure you'll do that?" Marco asked sarcastically. "Let's see, it's you versus
Chapman, the cops, a bunch of Hork-Bajir and Taxxons, and, worst of all, that creep, Visser
Three. All you can do to fight them is turn into a dog and bite their ankles. It's like being
stuck in the most impossible video game ever invented."
I grinned. Or at least I showed my teeth. "Yeah, it is, kind of. But I'm pretty good at video
games."
"And he won't be alone," Rachel said. "I'm in this, too."
"And me," Tobias said.
"Me, too," Cassie agreed.
"Swell," Marco said. "So suddenly you're the Fantastic Four. This isn't a comic book. This is
real."
We heard the sound of people coming through the dunes. The meeting of the full members
had broken up.
"Everyone, quiet," I said. "We'll let this ride... for now."
I said that to calm Marco down. I had no intention of letting it ride.
I pulled Cassie aside. "Listen, Cassie, I need an animal morph that will let me watch
Chapman without him seeing me. What do you have at the farm?"
Cassie got quiet for a moment. "Let me think. We have a lot of injured birds, of course. We
have the wolf with the broken leg. We have the wildcat with one eye."
I waited while she went down a list of all the animals in the Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic.
58
Suddenly Cassie snapped her fingers. "I wonder.... How small an animal do you think we
can morph?"
I shrugged. I had no idea.
"I may have something in mind," she said. "It's not really in the clinic as a patient. It just sort
of lives there. It's small. It can crawl up walls. It's fast, if you need to get away. And I guess it
can hear and see okay."
Which is how I ended up in Cassie's barn later that night, crawling beneath cages full of sick
buzzards and between a pair of jumpy deer, looking for lizards.
59
CHAPTER 16
I did it Monday morning in my locker at school. I turned into a lizard.
A green anole, to be exact. It's a member of the iguana family. Like you care.
I waited till the bell rang for first period, which was English class. When everyone else was
out of the hallway, I just climbed into my locker. I tried to act cool about it, just in case
anyone was watching.
The locker was about two inches shorter than me, so I had to crouch. And it was so tight I
couldn't move. The only light was from the three small ventilation slits. I could hear my heart
pounding in the cramped, dark space. I was afraid.
It was one thing to turn into a dog. I mean, it's weird, it's strange, but it's also kind of cool.
Dogs are cool animals. But lizards?
"I should have practiced," I muttered under my breath. "I really should have practiced like
Cassie said."
I started to focus for the morphing. I remembered the way we had caught the lizard the night
before last. We'd spotted it with a flashlight, and Cassie had put a bucket over it so it couldn't
get away.
It had been fairly creepy, just touching it to acquire its DNA pattern. Now I was going to decome
it.
The first thing I noticed was that I suddenly had more room inside the locker. I didn't have to
crouch down. And my shoulders weren't scrunched up anymore.
I touched my face with one hand. My skin was looser than it should have been. And pebbly
to the touch.
I ran my hand over my head. My hair was almost all gone.
Things began to happen very fast. The locker grew and grew around me. It was big as a barn.
Big as a stadium!
It was like falling. Like falling off a skyscraper and taking forever to hit the ground.
I was standing on something sticky, as large as a boulder. How had a boulder gotten into my
locker? But then I realized  it was a wad of gum! An old, chewed wad of gum stuck to the
bottom of my locker.
Gigantic drapes as big as the sails of a ship were falling all around me. They were my
clothes. In the dim light I could see two monstrous, misshapen things on either side of me. I
could just make out the Nike swoosh, and realized they were my shoes. They were the size of
houses.
And then the lizard brain kicked in.
Fear! Trapped! Run! Run! Rruunrunrun!
60
I shot left. A wall! I scampered up, feeling my feet stick to it. Trapped! I jumped back.
Another hard surface. Trapped! Runrunrunrun!
I fought to get control, but the lizard brain was panicked. It didn't know where it was. It
wanted out. OUT!
Go toward the light! I ordered my new body. The ventilation slits. That was the way out.
But the body was afraid of the light. It was terrified.
I was still bouncing off the walls. I could not overcome the panic instincts of the lizard body.
Go to the light! I screamed inside my head. And suddenly I was there. I poked my head out,
and my body slithered after me. My tongue flicked out and I got a weird kind of input from it.
Like smell, only not quite. It kept flicking. I could see it shoot out of my mouth and lick the
air.
In the bright light I realized how bad the lizard eyes were. I couldn't make sense of what I
was seeing. Everything was shattered and twisted around. Down was up and up was down.
Colors weren't even close to right.
I tried to think. Come on, Jake. You have eyes on the side of your head now. They don't
focus together. They see different things. Deal with it.
I tried to make sense of the pictures, using this knowledge, but they were still a mess. It
seemed to take me forever to figure it out. One eye was looking down the hall to the left. The
other was looking down the halt to the right. I was upside down, gripping the side of the
locker, which was like a long, gray field that wouldn't end.
And all the time the green anole brain was fighting me. Now that it was out of the dark
locker, it desperately wanted to go back in.
Chapman's office, I reminded myself. But where was it?
Left. That way.
Suddenly I was off and running. Straight down the wall. Zoom! Then on level floor. Zoom!
Around a scrap of paper twice as big as I was. The ground flew past. It was like being
strapped onto a crazy, out-of-control missile.
Then my lizard brain sensed the spider. It was a strange thing, like I wasn't sure if I saw the
spider, or heard it, or smelled it, or tasted it on my flicking lizard tongue, or just suddenly
knew it was there.
I took off after it, racing at a million miles an hour before I could even think about stopping.
My legs were a blur, they moved so fast.
It probably wasn't a huge spider. Not if you were a great big human being. But to my lizard
eyes it looked as big as a small child. It was huge. I could see the compound eyes. I could see
the individual joints in its eight legs. I could see the clicking, awful mandibles.
61
The spider ran. I ran after it. I was faster.
Noooooooooooo! I screamed inside my head. But too late. My head jerked forward, fast as a
striking snake. My jaws snapped. And suddenly the spider was in my mouth.
I could feel it fighting. I could feel the spider's legs squirming and fighting to get out of my
mouth.
I tried to spit it out, but I couldn't. The lizard's hunger for that spider was too great.
I swallowed the spider. It was like swallowing a whole canned ham. A canned ham that was
fighting all the way down.
No, no, no! my brain cried in horror and disgust. But at the same time, the lizard brain was
pleased. I could feel it become slightly calmer.
That does it! I told myself. I am out of this morph!
I wanted out of that horrible little body. I didn't care who saw me, I was going to morph back
to human shape. Marco was right. It was insane to get involved in this. Insane!
I heard the ground shake. It was a noise like a giant stomping across the land.
It was a giant.
There was a huge shadow in the sky. It was like someone was trying to crush me by dropping
an entire building on my head.
The shoe came down!
I scampered left.
Another shoe.
My tail! The shoe was on my tail! I was trapped!
62
CHAPTER 17
In panic, I tried to run. But my tail was caught.
Suddenly I was free! How had that...
I realized what had happened. My tail had snapped off. Looking back, I saw it, still trapped
by the giant shoe. It squirmed as if it were still alive. It wiggled like a worm on a hook.
The shoe lifted and flew through the air again.
I shot up the side of the wall and froze in place.
The giant had not seen me. It had not tried to stomp me. It had been an accident. And now my
tail... no, the lizard's tail...
The giant walked on, shaking the ground as it went.
I focused one lizard eye on the figure. It was like trying to make sense out of one of those
carnival fun mirrors. But even so, I was pretty sure it was Chapman.
I watched him head down the hall. And with all my power, I ordered my lizard body to
follow him.
I tried not to think about the spider in my stomach, or the fact that it was still not completely
dead. I tried not to think about the fact that part of my body was back on the floor, jerking
like it was still alive. I just raced along after Chapman.
Because Chapman might reveal something that would help Tom.
I planned to follow Chapman to his office. I'd hide under his desk and listen to him make
phone calls. I figured sooner or later he might let something slip about the location of the
Yeerk pool.
Cassie and I had talked about it. She'd said it could take days of hiding in Chapman's office
before we learned anything. Besides, we could only stay in a morph for two hours. And
meanwhile, I would be skipping class. Sooner or later, I'd get in trouble over that.
And the really funny thing is, when they catch you skipping class, you get sent to the
assistant principal.
Mr. Chapman.
I could just imagine that scene.... Sorry I skipped class, Mr. Chapman, but I've been in this
lizard body, watching you because I know you're a Controller and part of a giant alien
conspiracy to take over the earth.
I would have laughed, only lizards can't laugh. So I just followed Chapman as he marched
down the hall.
Suddenly he stopped. Were we at his office?
63
I looked around as well as I could, ft didn't look like the office. The spider gave a kick in my
stomach.
He opened a door. It swung right over me with a big rush of air. It went just above my head
as t hugged the floor.
I concentrated on making sense of the sights. Wait a minute! This was the janitor's closet, a
mess of mops and buckets and cleaning solutions. What was Chapman doing... ?
He went inside. I followed, careful to stay away from the high leather walls that were his
shoes.
I heard a loud click. He had locked the door behind him.
It was a long way up from the floor, but I could more or less see him doing things to the sink
faucet. I thought he grabbed one of the hooks they used to hang up the dirty mop heads. I was
pretty sure he twisted it because I could hear a squeaking sound.
And to my total and complete amazement, the wall opened.
There was a doorway where the wall had been. Strange smells and stranger sounds wafted up
from inside the doorway.
Chapman stepped through. There were stairs just inside, heading down into a purple-lit pit.
From far away, as if it came from a hundred miles down, I heard a faint sound.
It was a scream. A scream of fear and despair. A human voice, crying out in the darkness of
that horrible place.
"Noooo!" the voice moaned. "Noooo!"
I knew what the scream meant. I knew what was happening. Somewhere down there, a
human being was feeling the Yeerk slug slither inside its brain. Somewhere down there, a
human being was being turned into a mindless slave of the Yeerks.
Chapman headed down the stairs.
The door closed behind him.
I had found the Yeerk pool.
It was right under my school.
64
CHAPTER 18
"Screams," I said. "Human screams. They sounded far off, but that's what they were."
My friends looked at me. All but Marco, who looked away. It was that same afternoon, right
after school. We'd gone to the mall. We figured it was the best way not to look suspicious.
No one thinks there's anything weird about kids hanging together at the mall.
We were at a table in the food court, sharing some nachos. Ever since eating the spider, I'd
had a desire to consume lots of junk food to help me forget.
"You were a lizard at the time," Marco pointed out. "Who knows what you heard?"
"I know," I said.
"I can't stand the thought of what's happening to people down there," Cassie said. She
shuddered. "It's sickening."
"We have to do something," Rachel said.
"Yeah, let's rush right down there," Marco said. "Then it can be us screaming."
I realized I had lost my appetite for nachos.
"Marco, you can't just ignore what's going on," Rachel said.
"Sure I can," he said. "All I have to do is remind myself that hey, guess what? I don't want to
die."
"That's it, then?" Rachel demanded, outraged. "Just whatever is best for Marco?"
"I don't think Marco is being selfish," Cassie said. "Just the opposite. He's thinking about his
father. About what would happen to his dad if Marco... "
"He's not the only one who's got people to worry about," Rachel said. "I have a family. We
all do."
"Not me," Tobias said softly. He smiled his sad, crooked smile. "It's true. No one gives a rat's
rear about me."
"I do," Rachel said.
I was surprised to hear her say that. Rachel isn't exactly sentimental.
"Look," I said. "I'm not asking anyone else to go with me. But I don't have a choice. I heard
that scream today. And I know Tom is going down there tonight. He's my brother. I have to
try and save him." I held out my hands, helpless. "I have to do it. For Tom."
"I'll go with you," Tobias said, "For the Andalite."
"There's no one else who can do anything to stop the Yeerks," Rachel said. "I'm scared to
death, just thinking about it. But I'm there."
65
Marco looked sick. He gave me a dirty took. He shook his head. "This is bad," he said. "This
is so bad. If it wasn't for Tom I'd walk away."
"Look, Marco, you don't have to  " I started to say.
"Oh, shut up!" he snapped. "You're my best friend, you jerk. Like I'm going to let you go face
all this alone? I'm in. I'm in, to rescue Tom. That's it. Then I'm done."
Only Cassie had remained silent. She was looking dreamily off over the heads of the mall
crowd. "You know, back in the old days  I mean, the real, real old days  the Africans, the
early Europeans, the Native Americans... they all believed animals had spirits. And they
would call on those spirits to protect them from evil. They would ask the spirit of the fox for
his cunning. They'd ask the spirit of the eagle for his sight. They would ask the lion for his
strength."
"I guess what we're doing is sort of basic. Even though it was Andalite technology that made
it possible. We're still just scared little humans, trying to borrow the mind-of the fox, and the
eyes of the eagle... or the hawk," she added, smiling at Tobias. "And the strength of the
lion. Just like thousands of years ago, we're calling on the animals to help protect us from
evil."
"Will their strength be enough?" I wondered.
"I don't know," Cassie admitted solemnly. "It's like all the basic forces of planet Earth are
being brought into the battle."
Marco rolled his eyes. "Nice story, Cassie. But we're five normal kids. Up against the Yeerks.
If it was a football game, who would you bet on? We're toast."
"Don't be so sure," Cassie said. "We're fighting for Mother Earth. She has some tricks up her
sleeves."
"Good grief," Marco said. "Let's all buy Birkenstocks and go hug some trees,"
We all laughed, including Cassie.
"Cassie is right about one thing," Rachel said seriously. "The only thing we have going for us
is this animal morphing thing. And so far the only morphs we've acquired are a cat, a bird, a
dog, a horse, and a lizard. I think we need a little more firepower. We should head for The
Gardens. We need to acquire more DNA  from some animals that are not going to be easy
to acquire."
I nodded. "Yeah. I don't think the hawk, horse, and lizard team is going to impress the
Yeerks. Rachel's right. I think we have to head to The Gardens. We need to get some help
from Mother Earth's toughest children." I looked to Cassie. "Can you get us in?"
"I can get in free," she said. "You guys will have to pay, but I can use my mom's employee
discount, so it'll be cheaper."
"Oh, I'm sure we could talk them into letting us in for nothing," Marco said. "Just tell them
we're Animorphs."
66
"Tell them we're what?" Rachel asked.
"Idiot teenagers with a death wish," Marco said.
"Animorphs." I tried the word out. It sounded okay.
67
CHAPTER 19
We left straight from the mall, hopping a bus out to The Gardens, which is clear across the
city. On the way, I tried to catch up on my homework. I had missed a lot of classes that day,
so I borrowed class notes from my friends. Rachel kept perfect notes. Tobias had terrible
notes with all kinds of little drawings in the margins. It took a while before I could figure out
what they were. They were buildings and people and cars, the way they looked from high up
in the sky.
"I don't really need to go in," Tobias said as we pooled our limited cash to buy tickets. "I'm
happy with just my hawk morph. I don't want to be anything else."
"I think that's a mistake," Rachel said. "Our one real weapon is the power to morph. We
should acquire as many useful morphs as we can."
"What kind of animal morphs are going to be able to deal with Visser Three when he turns
into that big monster that ate the Andalite?" I asked. There was nothing in this zoo or any
other that was going to kick that big monster's butt.
Marco winked. "Fleas? No one can kill fleas. We'll itch him to death."
I had to smile. "So now you're suddenly Mr. Hopeful?"
"No, I'm just so scared I'm getting weird," he said. "I haven't done this morphing stuff. You
guys all have. I'm not even a full-fledged Animorph yet I'm still normal."
"I still feel normal," Cassie said. She looked troubled.
"Cassie, you can turn into a horse," Marco said. "Very few normal kids can do that. It's
different for Jake, turning into a lizard. He's always been a reptile."
I took a good-natured swing at Marco, but he dodged it. It was cool having Marco with us 
even if he was giddy.
It took about a half an hour to reach the main gate of The Gardens. I climbed down off the
bus feeling nervous  not at all like I usually felt going there. I mean, The Gardens is just
about my favorite place to go, normally. But normally I'm not going there to get personal
with dangerous animals.
The main part of The Gardens is rides. They have all the usual stuff, like roller coasters,
which are my personal favorite, and Ferris wheels and water slides.
But they also have an animal part, which is like a zoo, only cooler. They do dolphin shows,
and there's this whole section where you can get close to some of the safer animals. And this
monkey habitat they have is like a whole monkey city, practically. Anyway, if I were an
animal, and I had to be in a zoo, I'd want to be there.
Cassie led us to the main building, which holds all kinds of exhibits. It has everything but the
really big animals that need lots of space. Those animals are farther out, mostly, in big grassy
habitats that look like parks. Parks with walls and moats and fences around them.
68
The main building is supposed to be like a rain forest, I guess. It's where they keep animals
that need to be warm all the time. There's a pathway that winds around with tall tropical trees
overhead, with bushes here and there between the exhibits.
Some of the exhibits are tiny, and some are really big, like the area they have for otters. It has
a waterfall and a water slide for the otters to play in.
We were near the otter habitat when Cassie stopped. "Okay, now everyone stay together, and
try not to be too suspicious-looking," she said. I'm taking you inside."
"Inside where?" Marco asked.
"Well, the way it works is, there are walkways behind all these exhibits. That's how they feed
the animals and give them meds or whatever. Meds are medicines. Sorry." She pointed to an
inconspicuous doorway. "Anyway, we can go in through there."
It was an odd change from outside to inside. One minute, we were in this fake rain forest. The
next minute, we were in what looked like a hallway at school. Only the smell was worse 
kind of damp and moldy and musty. More like the boys' locker room.
"Okay, look, if any staff people stop us, the story is we're here to see my mom," Cassie said.
"Of course, it's so late in the afternoon she won't be here. I hope. Because if she finds out I've
been dragging four of my friends around back here.... Well, I can't be saving the world from
alien invaders if I'm grounded. Hopefully, there won't be many staff people here at all."
We shuffled along the hallway, feeling like we definitely did not belong. Which we didn't.
On either side of the main hall, there were side paths that led to the different exhibits.
Unfortunately, the doorways to the exhibits just had numbers on them. I knew we'd have to
rely on Cassie's knowledge to find our way around. Behind some of those doors were animals
you didn't want to just walk in on.
"How do you guys feel about gorillas?" Cassie said. She had stopped by one of the numbered
doors. "This is Big Jim's cage. He just came over from another zoo, so he's in his own private
environment for now. He's very gentle."
Slowly it dawned on me what Cassie was saying. "Oh. You mean, does one of us want to
acquire his DNA?"
"That is why we're here, Jake," Rachel pointed out. She batted her eyes at Marco. "How
about you, Marco? Haven't you always wanted to be a big, hairy guy?"
Marco didn't look like he was crazy about the idea. But I knew how to handle Marco.
"Maybe Marco should try something easier for his first morph," I said. "You know, like a
cuddly little koala or something."
That did it.
"Koala?" Marco said, giving me a dirty look. "Open that door, Cassie." He hesitated. "You
said gentle, right?"
69
"Gorillas are extremely gentle," Cassie said. Then, in a quieter voice, she added, "Unless you
make them mad."
Cassie opened her backpack. She took out an apple and handed it to Marco. "Here. You just
open the door. The way it's set up, none of the visitors will be able to see you unless you
walk clear out into the cage. Besides, there's an extra security gate, so he can't just jump out
and you can't just walk in. So we just open the door, and hope Big Jim feels like eating."
Behind the door was a second door of steel bars, with a little cutaway section for the handlers
to shove the food through. The entire door opening was concealed behind a fake rock ledge
so it wasn't visible to the people looking into the cage. But Big Jim noticed us right away. He
climbed heavily down from his perch on a rock ledge and took a good look at us through the
bars.
Big Jim was definitely big. He had fingers the size of my wrist. But Jim didn't seem to mind
us being there. Mostly he seemed interested in Marco's apple. He looked Marco over, snorted
like he wasn't impressed, and then held out his hand.
"Hand him the apple," Cassie directed. "He wants the apple."
"I loved your work in King Kong Versus Godzilla" Marco told the ape. He stuck his hand
through the bars and held out the apple. With surprising daintiness, the gorilla lifted the apple
and began inspecting it closely.
"Hold his hand," I said. "
"Yeah, right," Marco laughed.
"When you acquire DNA, the animal goes-into a kind of trance," I said. "Go ahead, grab his
hand and concentrate."
Marco tentatively touched the gorilla's wrist. "Nice monkey." The gorilla ignored him. Big
Jim was much more interested in the apple than in any of us.
"Concentrate," Rachel urged.
Marco closed his eyes. The ape closed his eyes.
"This is so cool," Tobias commented. "You realize that gorilla could pull Marco apart like he
was a paper doll. Look at those arms!"
Marco opened one eye. "Tobias? Being terrified gets in the way of concentrating. So how
about if you shut up about his arms?"
Suddenly I heard a whirring sound. I looked down the hall, then back. It was one of those
electric carts, like a golf cart. It was coming toward us.
"Just act natural," Cassie hissed. Marco slipped out and she slammed the door on Big Jim.
"As long as it isn't a security guy, we're probably okay."
70
The cart came up to us. Its driver was a man wearing a stained, tan lab coat over his jeans. In
the back of the cart were two large white plastic buckets full of something brown and
horrible-smelling. "Hey, you're Cassie, right? The doc's kid? How's it going?"
"Fine," Cassie said. She waved casually, and the man drove right on past.
"That was easy," Rachel said. "He didn't even seem to care that we're back here."
"Well, where next?" Cassie wondered. We were at a four-way corner. There were blank,
white-painted hallways in all directions. An electric golf cart was parked there, too.
"What are we near?" I asked.
Cassie thought for a moment. "Okay, that walkway leads to the outer exhibits. That one leads
to the offices and storage facilities. These two go around the main building exhibits. We're
close to... let me see... um, bats and snakes that way. The jaguar and the dolphin tank that
way."
Rachel started down the hallway to our right. "Dolphins. I love dolphins."
"Wait," Cassie said, trotting after her. "What are we going to do with dolphin morphs?"
"I think we should go out to the big exhibits," Marco said. "Let's get serious about this. We
need firepower. Come on."
"Let's stick together," I said as Marco started down the hall. I reached out to grab him before
he got too far away.
And that's when the voice yelled, "Hey! Hey, you! What are you kids doing back here?"
I saw a guy in a brown uniform.
"Security!" Cassie yelped. "Oh, man, they'll take us all in to the office. They'll call my mom.
I do not want to explain this to her."
"Split up!" I said, trying to sound like a leader. "Just like at the construction site: One guy
can't get us all!"
"This guy looks like my grandfather," Rachel said. "Not like that Hork-Bajir that was after
us."
"You kids hold on!"
"Oh, man. Oh, man," Cassie said. With that, she took off down one hallway. Rachel and
Tobias went after her.
Marco was already twenty yards down the other hall, the one that led out to the large
exhibits. I ran to catch up.
The guard reached the corner. I saw him glance toward Tobias and the girls. Then he looked
at me and Marco. I guess Marco and I looked more suspicious, because he chose us.
71
"Stop! You kids better stop!"
"Let's grab the golf cart!" Marco said.
"Steal a golf cart?"
"If we don't take it, that guard will."
"Good point."
We jumped in the cart. Marco slid behind the wheel. He turned the key to "on." He looked at
me.
"Just like driving bumper cars, right?"
"Only you try not to hit anything."
He put his foot down on the pedal. The electric motor made a whirring sound, and we took
off.
Straight toward the wall.
Bam!
"Hey, try steering," I yelled.
We backed up and took off again. We picked up speed. Enough to pull away from the guard,
but when I looked back, he was still jogging after us.
"He's going to have a heart attack," I said.
"Which way?"
"What?"
"Which way?"
I turned around to face forward. We had reached a "T" corner. "Right!" I yelled.
Naturally, Marco turned left. I nearly fell out.
Almost immediately, we reached another corner. This time Marco did choose right. And I did
fall out of the cart.
I hit the linoleum and rolled. Then I was up and racing to catch the cart.
"What are you doing?" Marco demanded when he saw me. "Quit playing around."
I just gave him a dirty look and climbed back in.
"I think we lost the guard," Marco said.
72
"I'm fine, thanks for asking," I said. "Just a few bruises. Maybe a cracked skull. Nothing
serious."
"Where do you think we are?"
"I think we are in the longest tunnel I've ever seen," I said. It was more and more like a tunnel
now. The floor was still linoleum and the walls were still whitewashed, but the lights were
getting more spread out, so you definitely had the feeling you were underground.
"I wonder if they caught the others," Marco said. "Now do you see why it's crazy to think we
can beat the Yeerks? I mean, come on: We can barely beat zoo security."
"We haven't beat anyone yet," I said grimly. "Look!"
Way up ahead, there were two guys in brown uniforms.
"Maybe they don't know who we are," Marco suggested. "They might think we're regular
employees."
"Maybe. But not if they get a good look at us." I pointed. "There's a turnoff. Take it."
We turned. At the same time, the guards started yelling. The side corridor grew narrow. Too
narrow for the golf cart.
"Ditch it!"
I jumped out. Marco jumped after me. We could hear the guards' footsteps as they ran down
the main tunnel. These guys were in better shape than the old man. These guys could run.
The corridor ended abruptly. There were two doors, one a little to the left, one a little farther
to the right. They were labeled P-201 and P-203. No help at all.
"Pick a door," Marco said.
I took a deep breath, "Door number one." I opened P-201. A blast of fresh air hit me. Sunlight
blinded me. I blinked, trying to get my eyes to adjust.
The rhinoceros blinked, too.
"Ahhhh!" I yelled.
"Ahhhh!" Marco yelled.
We jumped back and slammed the door.
"Wrong door!" Marco said.
"Definitely wrong!" I agreed.
"Hey, you kids! Stop right there!"
73
The guards were just at the end of the corridor.
"Gotta try door number two!" I said.
"Do it!"
We opened the door and ran through.
There were trees all around us. Trees and grass. We were in the shade. Sunlight filtered down
through the leaves. Just ahead the bushes gave way to open grass.
"Where are we?" Marco asked.
"Like I know?"
We worked our way through some bushes, keeping a careful eye out in all directions. We
didn't see any animals. Just some birds up in the trees.
"Hey, there are people!" Marco said. He dropped down behind a bush and pointed.
There were people lined up behind a railing. They were high up. Or else we were low down. I
parted the bushes to get a better look. The people were leaning against a railing at the top of a
high concrete wall. They couldn't see us because of the bushes. But they were definitely all
staring at something.
"We're definitely in one of the habitats," I said. "Those are people looking at... at whatever
is in here with us. I'm just hoping it isn't that rhino. That thing was way too big."
"How do we get out of here?"
"I don't know, let's just get away from the door. Those guards will be coming after us any
second." But, you know, in the back of my mind I was thinking, Hmm, why haven't those
guards come after us yet?
Marco and I crawled through the bushes and around the bases of the big trees. We reached a
corner of the wall, hidden from all the people above.
"That is an awfully high wall," Marco observed. "That's got to be thirty feet high. This is not
good. That wall is high for a reason. There's something in here that they don't want to escape.
"
I scanned the wall. There was a steel ladder set into the concrete about fifty yards away. "I
guess that's the only way out."
"Let me ask you something," Marco said. "Why haven't the guards come after us? I mean, if
this was, like, the deer and antelope exhibit, they'd come right in, wouldn't they?"
"We have to think, not panic," I said. "I am trying not to think about why the guards didn't
come in here." I moved back into the shadows of the bushes. "Besides, maybe there's nothing
in here at all."
I squatted down on my haunches.
74
My butt touched something warm.
I had a terrible feeling right at that moment. I looked up and saw Marco. Normally, Marco
has kind of a dark, tanned face. But his face was white. And his eyes were very large.
"Marco," I said, very slowly and very quietly, "is there something behind me?"
He nodded.
"What is it, Marco?"
"Um... Jake? It's a tiger."
75
CHAPTER 20
A male Siberian tiger, to be exact. Ten feet long. Seven hundred pounds of deadly speed and
unbelievable power.
You know those old Tarzan movies you see on TV sometimes, where Tarzan is wrestling a
tiger? And actually winning? Let me tell you something. You want to know what your
chances are of wrestling a tiger and coming out alive? They're about the same as your
chances of jumping off the Empire State Building and surviving.
"I have an idea," Marco said shakily. "Let's leave."
"Don't run," I said. "It might just get his attention."
"I think he's noticed us," Marco said. "I think he knows we're here, Jake. I think he's looking
right at us! Look at his teeth!"
"Don't freak! I have an idea. The morphing. If I acquire him, it'll put him in a trance."
"Acquire? Acquire what? You can't acquire anything about him. He's the acquirer, and you're
the acquiree. He's going to acquire your butt for dinner! He's going to acquire you and spit
out the bones."
I swallowed hard. I tried to touch the tiger, but my hand was shaking too much. I took a
couple of deep breaths. I heard somewhere that's supposed to calm you down, t guess it
works. Unless you're practically sitting on a tiger. Then absolutely nothing calms you down.
"Nice tiger," I whispered.
He just watched me. He had this lazy "who cares?" look. This look of total, complete,
absolute confidence. Almost like he thought I was funny. Like maybe he enjoyed watching
me shiver and shake.
"Please don't kill me," I said.
"Don't kill me, either," Marco added.
I reached my shaking hand toward the tiger. His eyes followed my hand, I touched his flank.
It rose and fell with his breathing.
"Concentrate," Marco whispered.
I was already concentrating real hard on the tiger. I was concentrating on his teeth, I was
concentrating on the rippling muscles under his pale orange and black pelt. I was totally
concentrating on the fact that he could swing that big, massive paw of his and send my head
flying across the grass like a soccer ball.
Then the tiger's breathing slowed. His eyes fluttered a little and slowly closed.
"How long does the trance last?" Marco whispered.
76
"Well, about ten seconds after you break contact. That's what it was with Homer."
"Ten seconds? Ten seconds?"
"Yeah. So be ready to run."
"I've been ready to run!"
I started to pull away, but then I hesitated. It was a strange moment, because right then I
realized what I was doing. It hit me. This tiger was becoming part of me. All that power and
confidence was becoming part of me.
"He's beautiful, isn't he?" I said.
I expected Marco to say something sarcastic. But he said, "Yes. He's magnificent." Then he
added, "But let's get out of here before he shows us why he's king of the jungle."
"That's lions," I said. "They're supposed to be king of the jungle. But let's not tell him that.
You ready?"
He nodded.
"Now!" I yelled.
I jumped up and we tore for the ladder. In my head I was counting off the seconds: one-one
thousand, two-one thousand, three-one thousand...
Something moved. Fast! An orange and black blur!
Right then I realized it. Duh. There was more than one tiger in the habitat.
I heard screams coming from the spectators above. I guess they could see us now that we
were out of the bushes.
Marco leaped and grabbed the rungs of the ladder. He scrambled up. I was about one-tenth of
a second behind him. The tiger leaped. His claws scraped the concrete just inches below me.
And then he let out a roar that made the rungs of the ladder vibrate in my hands.
Ggggggrrrrraaaawwwrrrr!
What a noise! It echoed and reverberated and made my insides turn to liquid.
Marco practically flew up the ladder and over the side of the wall. I flew right after him.
It's amazing how fast you can climb a ladder when there's a tiger roaring for your blood.
"There they are!" someone yelled, "Get them. Stop!"
Guards! At least three of them.
"Should we morph?" Marco yelled to me.
77
"No! Just head for the crowds! There! Over by the dolphin tank."
It was a close call, but we made it to a big crowd just a dozen feet ahead of the guards.
From that point, all we had to do was hunch down and squirm between all the people till the
guards lost sight of us. We worked our way to the front gate, always crouching so our heads
wouldn't show above the crowds.
"What did you do, morph into a midget?" It was Rachel. She was right in front of me, looking
amused. Tobias and Cassie were there, too.
"The guards were after us," I said. I had almost stopped shaking from my close encounter
with the big cats. Almost.
"Oh, quit playing around, Jake," Rachel said. "Let's get out of here. I have to be home for
dinner."
It turned out the other three had not been chased at all. They'd lost the guards easily, and had
just gone on acquiring morphs while Marco and I were risking our lives in the tiger habitat.
The most annoying thing was that none of them even believed our story. Marco and I were a
little resentful over that.
We climbed on board the bus and practically collapsed into the seats.
"We could have been killed," Marco said, pouting. "Really. I'm telling you. It was down to a
few inches."
"Yeah, whatever," Rachel said. "Don't obsess over it. After all, we still have tonight to deal
with. Whatever danger you think you had today, it will probably be nothing, next to what's
going to happen tonight."
"Tonight." Cassie shook her head. "And I haven't even thought about studying for that math
test tomorrow."
Rachel laughed. "We may not have to worry about tomorrow."
"Thank you, Little Miss Cheerful," Marco muttered under his breath.
78
CHAPTER 21
"Where have you been all afternoon and evening?" my mom asked me as we sat down for
dinner. My family is very old-fashioned about dinner. We ah have to sit at the table. No TV.
My mom's a writer, so she hates TV unless it's one of her favorite programs.
"Where have I been?" I repeated the question. "I'm... hanging out. You know. Hanging with
Marco."
"I don't know why you bother to ask," my dad said. "His answer is always the same 
hanging out."
"So what did you do at work today, Dad?" I asked him.
"Hung out," he said. He gave me a wink and we all laughed.
I glanced over at Tom. He was eating chicken cacciatore like the rest of us and laughing. He
seemed so normal.
"You doing anything tonight, Tom?" I asked him.
"Why?"
I tried to look casual. "You know, I was thinking maybe we could shoot some hoops," I said.
"Maybe you could teach me some new moves and I could take another shot at making the
team."
"Sorry, man," he said. "I have things to do tonight."
"Yeah, like what?" I asked.
"Hanging out, no doubt," my mom said. "Eat the broccoli, Jake, it's good for you. It's full of
trace minerals and vitamins you can't get anywhere else."
"Okay," I said to my mom, "You know how much I love trace minerals." I popped the
smallest piece of broccoli I could find and tried to gag it down. I guess it wasn't any worse
than eating a live spider.
"So, Tom, what was it you said you were doing?" I asked again.
He gave me a dirty look. "Do I have to check in with you now? I have things to do. Is that
okay, little brother?"
"A girl," my dad commented. "I know these things. I'm a doctor."
No, Dad, not a girl, I wanted to say  a Yeerk pool. What's a Yeerk pool, Mom? Well, it's
kind of a long story.
I decided to try one more time. I guess a part of me still refused to believe what Tom was.
"Maybe you're just afraid to shoot hoops with me. Maybe I'd kick your butt."
"Yeah, that's it. Happy now?" Tom sneered.
79
His gaze met mine. Was there some sign in those eyes? Some evidence of the selfish, evil
creature that was controlling him? No. I wish there had been.
But there is no way to know who is a Controller and who isn't. No way. It's what makes them
so hard to stop. They can be anyone. Anywhere.
Even a person you think you know. A person you admire. Look up to. Love.
I broke my gaze away from Tom's and looked down at my food.
A few minutes later, Tom got up to go. I knew where he was going. After he left, I went to
the upstairs phone, where my parents couldn't overhear me. I called Marco.
"He's on his way," I said.
I called Tobias and Rachel. I tried to call Cassie, but I got her mother instead.
"She's not in," her mom said. She sounded worried. "She wasn't home for dinner. She went
out to feed some of the animals and didn't come back."
My stomach clenched.
"She's probably just out riding one of the horses," I said, trying to reassure myself as much as
Cassie's mom. "You know Cassie."
"All the horses are in their stalls," she said.
I took a couple of deep breaths. Something was wrong. What had happened to Cassie?
"I'll look around for her," I said. "Don't worry. I'll bet she just saw some injured animal or
something and went off to rescue it. You know Cassie," I said again.
"Yes, I'm sure she's fine."
Right. She was about as sure as I was. But what could I do? The plan was set to attack the
Yeerk pool and rescue Tom. Maybe Cassie was already at the school, waiting.
Maybe.
I had a very bad feeling as I rode my bike to the school. I hid the bike across the street, the
way we had planned. Then I hooked up with Marco and Rachel.
"Cassie's missing," I said. "And where's Tobias?"
Rachel pointed up at the sky. The sun was setting fast, but I could see Tobias circling high
overhead.
"What is the matter with him?" I exploded. "He's got a two-hour time limit and we don't
know how long this is going to take!"
80
"Maybe we should bail until we find out what happened with Cassie," Rachel said.
"Could be she's just scared," Marco said. "I am."
"Maybe," I agreed, although I doubted it. But they say you never know who's going to be
brave or cowardly in a battle.
I just hoped I wasn't a coward. The truth was, my mouth was already dry and my heart was
already pounding. And we hadn't even done anything yet.
Tobias swooped down and perched on Rachel's shoulder, ft surprised me a little. Why would
Tobias perch on Rachel's shoulder? And she didn't seem at all annoyed. She rubbed her head
against him a little.
Are we doing this, or not? Tobias asked.
This was not starting off right at all. The bad feeling in my stomach was just getting worse.
Cassie missing. Tobias already morphed.
Everyone was looking at me, waiting for me to decide.
"Yeah, we're doing it," I said.
The school was locked up for the night. But Marco had taken care of that little problem. He
knew of a window in the science lab that didn't lock.
We crawled into the science lab through the window. It was dark, except for the dying light
of the sun that glinted off the glass beakers and test tubes. Tobias drifted through and landed
neatly on the teacher's desk.
"Let me take a look," I said. I opened the door as slowly as I could and peeked out through
the crack. I could see down the nearly dark hallway to the janitor's closet. Instantly I pulled
back in.
"There are people out there!" I said. "Three people heading into the closet."
"Controllers," Rachel said. "I guess it's dinnertime for Yeerks."
None of us thought that was very funny.
"How are we going to get in there?" Marco asked.
"Wait a minute," Rachel said. "Do all the Controllers know each other by sight? I mean,
maybe we're Controllers, right?"
"So we just walk right on in like we belong there?" Marco asked. "Wonderful plan, Rachel. I
have a better idea  let's just kill ourselves now and get it over with."
"Maybe Rachel's right," I said.
81
"Big maybe," Marco pointed out. "Big, huge maybe. How about Tom? He would know
whether you were a Controller."
I cracked the door again and looked out. "I think Tom's already down there," I said. "Besides,
the hallway's empty now. I guess they all... " I fell silent. "Wait, here comes someone."
I stared. It wasn't easy to see faces in the gloom. I could tell there were two people. One was
wearing a uniform.
It was the Controller policeman. And he was rudely yanking someone along with him. I could
see that it was a girl.
I didn't really want to see any more.
"Tobias," I said. "I need you to use your hawk's eyes,"
Tobias fluttered over and stood on my shoulder. He peeked his fierce head out into the hall
and then drew back.
Yes, he said. It's her.
I felt like the floor had opened underneath me. Marco grabbed me because I looked like I was
about to fall over.
"They have her!" I whispered. "The Controllers. They have Cassie!"
82
CHAPTER 22
"Who has Cassie... now?" Rachel stammered.
"That policeman. The Controller, the one who came out to Cassie's farm. The one who was at
The Sharing meeting. He has her. He saw her at the meeting trying to get close to the full
members."
Rachel let go a few choice words.
We hadn't even started and already everything was a disaster
"Okay," I said grimly. "We go ahead, like Rachel said. We figure there are too many
Controllers for all of them to know each other. I mean, they add new bodies all the time,
right? So maybe we're new Controllers, right?"
"Oh, man," Marco moaned.
"You have a better idea?" I snapped.
"No," he said. "I think we go ahead. We take our chances. Let's rock and roll."
"Okay, then, everyone act cool." I looked at Tobias. "Too late for you to morph back now.
But try not to let them see you."
Rachel, Marco, and I stepped out into the dark hallway. My legs were stiff. My knees were
rickety. I was walking like Frankenstein trying to look casual.
We headed for the janitor's closet. Fortunately, no one else was in the hallway.
We entered the tiny room and stepped inside. I tried to recall the sequence for opening the
door. Faucet to the left, then twist the second hook around right.
The door swung open.
There was more noise than there had been the other day. Or maybe it was just that my human
ears heard it better than my lizard ears had.
There was a deep sloshing, swooshing sound, almost like gentle surf breaking on the shore.
But that was the nice sound. The other sounds were horrifying  despairing cries, terrified
screams, shouts, shrieking triumphant laughter.
"You sure this is just the Yeerk pool?" Marco said in a nervous, shaky voice. "I see a guy
with horns and a pitchfork and I am outta here."
I stepped into the opening. The stairs were steep and there was no rail, so you felt like you
were about to pitch forward with every step.
We descended together. The door closed automatically behind us.
83
At first I guess I expected there to be maybe a couple dozen steps. But the steps never ended.
We just kept walking, and there were always more steps. The walls were dirt, then quickly
became rock as we went down, down, down. It felt like those stairs would never end.
"Some superior aliens," Marco whispered. "You'd think they could have put in an elevator."
We all giggled a little. Very little.
Suddenly, the rock walls widened out. We had emerged into a huge cavern.
And when I say huge, I mean huge. They could have played the Superbowl in there and had
room left over for a couple of malls. It was like a giant bowl turned upside down, all carved
out of solid rock. At the very top of the bowl was the faint outline of a hole. I thought I could
see stars through it.
All around the outer edges of the cavern I could see other stairways, like ours. They seemed
to come from every direction, appearing out of the rock walls, and leading down to the floor
of the cavern.
We clustered closer to the center of the stairway. It was a sheer drop off the side of the stairs.
"This is gigantic," Marco said. "This isn't just under the school. This is under half the town.
Those stairways must lead up to a dozen secret entrances." He shook his head. "Jake, they
have this entire area set up with secret passageways. Oh, man. This is worse... this is so
much worse... So much bigger... "
I felt the same despair. We were fools. This wasn't some little group of alien bad guys we
were dealing with. To build this underground city, these guys had power we couldn't even
imagine.
That's almost what it was. A city.
There were buildings and sheds all around the rim of the cavern. And we could see yellow
Caterpillar earthmovers and cranes at work on the far side of the cavern. They seemed
weirdly normal in this incredible place.
And there were creatures everywhere. Taxxons, Hork-Bajir, and other things I couldn't even
begin to guess at.
But mostly, there were humans. A lot of them.
At the very center of the cavern was a pool, like a small lake, maybe a hundred feet across,
and perfectly round. Only the water wasn't exactly water. It moved more like melted lead,
and was about the same color. The sloshing sound we could hear was the liquid of the pool
being rippled and splashed by hundreds of fast-moving things below the surface.
I knew what they were. Yeerks. Yeerks in their natural, sluglike state. They were swimming
and cavorting in the pool like kids on a hot day.
Near the edge of the pool were cages. In the cages were Hork-Bajir and human beings.
84
Some of the humans screamed for help. Some cried silently. Some just sat and waited, all
hope lost. There were adults there. And kids. Women and men. More than a hundred, packed
ten to a cage.
The captive Hork-Bajir were kept in separate, stronger cages. They paced and howled and
slashed at the air with their bladed arms.
I almost lost hope. I felt like my heart had stopped. This was a place of unimaginable horror.
And we were so few, and so weak.
Below us on the stairs I could see the Controller cop and Cassie. He was dragging her
roughly whenever she stumbled. They had reached the bottom of the stairs.
"I'm going to morph," I said. "I'm going to get Cassie away from him."
Marco put his hand on my shoulder. "Not time yet, dude. Be cool."
Cassie's okay, Jake, Tobias said. She isn't hurt. Just scared,
"He'd better not hurt her," I said. "Keep an eye on them, Tobias."
There were two low steel piers built out over the pool. On one, Hork-Bajir-Controllers
politely guarded a line of humans and Hork-Bajir and Taxxons.
This was the unloading station.
One by one the people knelt down, bent over, and dipped their heads toward the slimy
surface of the pool. The Hork-Bajir helped them.
As we watched, a woman calmly bent over, her head just inches above the lead-gray pool. A
Hork-Bajir held her elbow gently, to help her keep her balance.
Then we saw the thing dribbling, sliding, squirming, crawling out of her ear.
A Yeerk.
"Oh, no... " Rachel moaned. She sounded like she might be sick. "Oh, no. No."
When the Yeerk was all the way out of the poor woman's head, it dropped into the pool and
disappeared beneath the turbulent surface.
Instantly the woman cried out. "You filth, let me go! Let me go! I am a free woman! You
can't keep doing this! I am not a slave! Let me go!"
Two Hork-Bajir grabbed her. They dragged the woman to the nearest cage and threw her in.
"Help!" the woman screamed. "Oh, please, someone help. Help us all!"
85
CHAPTER 23
"Help! Please, someone help us!"
We had been hearing cries like that all the way down those steps. But now we were close
enough to give the cries a human face. It cut straight to my soul.
There was a second steel pier. That was the loading station. There the host bodies were
dragged from their holding cages to have the Yeerks reenter their heads. It was a pretty basic
process. They grabbed the hosts, whether human or Hork-Bajir, and forced their heads down
into the pool.
The people sometimes fought and screamed, and sometimes just cried. But they always lost.
When their heads were yanked back up out of the pool, we could see the slugs still slithering
into their ears.
After a few minutes they would become calm again, as the Yeerks regained control. Then off
they went, once more slaves of the Yeerks.
It was a horrible assembly line, from the unloading pier, to the holding cages, to the
infestation pier. They moved the poor victims through at a pretty speedy rate.
But there was another area we could only now see. There humans and Hork-Bajir waited on
comfortable chairs, sipping drinks and actually watching TV. Taxxons squirmed around like
gigantic spiny maggots.
I heard the faint sound of a television set. I was sure I could hear laughter from the humans.
They were watching the show and having a good laugh.
Those are the voluntary hosts, Tobias said. Collaborators.
"What are you talking about?" I demanded.
You remember, what the Andalite told us. Many humans and Hork-Bajir are voluntary
hosts, Tobias replied. The Yeerks persuade them to let them take over.
"I can't believe that," Rachel said. "No person would ever let this happen to them. No one
would ever give up control of himself."
"Some people are scum, Rachel," Marco said. "Sorry to burst your balloon."
The Yeerks convince them that taking on a Yeerk will solve all their problems. I think that's
what The Sharing is all about. People believe that by becoming something different, they can
leave behind all their pain.
"Like spending all their time as a hawk," Marco pointed out.
Tobias had nothing to say to that. He spread his wings and flew up and away.
"Tobias! Come back," I called to him.
86
"We have to get moving," Rachel said. "We've been standing here staring for too long." She
looked at Marco. "Don't be a jerk to Tobias, okay? We need everyone."
Tobias came swooping back toward us. Cassie, he said. She's on the pier. The infestation
pier. They're going to turn her into a host.
With my normal human eyes I couldn't see that well in the purple gloom. I could just make
out the cop's uniform and the small shape beside him.
"Do you see Tom?" I asked Tobias.
In answer he flapped his powerful wings and gained altitude. I saw him high over the pool.
Then he came back toward us in a power dive.
I see him, he said.
I hesitated before asking. I wasn't sure I wanted to know the answer. "Is he in the cages? Or
is he... voluntary?"
He's in a cage, Tobias said. He's yelling his brains out at the Hork-Bajir guards.
"Yes!" I knew Tom would never have gone voluntarily. I knew they must have taken him
kicking and punching.
Cassie is getting near the end of the pier, Tobias warned. We only have a few minutes
before they infest her!
It was time. We were at the bottom of the steps.
We ran over to hide behind a storage shed of some kind. Marco pulled me around the corner,
drawing me close so that I could hear him whisper. "Look, before we do this, there's one
thing, Jake. You have to promise me."
I knew what he was going to say.
"If I have to die, okay. But don't let them take me. Don't let them put one of those things in
my head."
"It'll be okay  "
"You!" a voice yelled. A human voice. "You two. Who are you?"
I spun around. A man. Just one man. But beside him, flanking him, was a big Hork-Bajir,
looking suspicious. And on the other side, a Taxxon.
Somehow the man hadn't seen Rachel. She was just around the corner of the building. But he
had seen Marco and me talking. I guess it hadn't looked quite right to him.
"Us?" Marco asked. "Who are we? Hey, who are you?"
"Take them," the man ordered.
87
The Hork-Bajir advanced on us. The Taxxon slithered forward on its dozens of sharp spiny
legs, red jelly eyes quivering, mouth opening and closing in anticipation.
I knew I had to morph. But I was frozen with fear.
Then I saw Rachel. She had gotten around behind the Controllers.
And she was getting very, very large.
88
CHAPTER 24
Rachel was getting larger very fast. Huge leathery ears sprouted suddenly from the side of
her head. Her nose stretched and stretched till it was longer than her body had been to start
with. Her arms and legs were big as tree trunks. And from her mouth grew two enormous,
curved teeth.
My cousin Rachel now stood almost thirteen feet high and weighed about fourteen thousand
pounds.
The weird thing was, I was happy about all this.
Ha HA! I heard Rachel's triumphant laugh. I did it.
The Hork-Bajir and the Taxxon came closer.
Rachel began twitching her little ropy tail. Her front legs pawed the dirt floor of the cavern.
She raised her massive head and stuck out her three-foot-long tusks.
The Taxxon was the first to notice her with his all-around red-jelly eyes, but I guess he didn't
know how to react.
Rachel charged. One minute she was standing there, and the next minute she was barreling
forward like an out-of-control eighteen-wheeler.
The Hork-Bajir was fast. He spun around and slashed at her trunk with his elbow blade.
Too little. Too late.
Rachel was moving, and no little flesh wound was going to stop her.
Puny little nothing! Rachel cried, outraged. You attack ME?!
The Hork-Bajir went down, crushed under her monstrous feet. He bellowed, but Rachel's
trumpeting was louder.
The Taxxon tried to run. It turns out Taxxons can move out when they want to.
It also turns out elephants are faster than you think. They can be very fast.
Rachel's foot caught the Taxxon's back end. The needle legs collapsed, cracking like broken
twigs. Yellow goo oozed from the popped flesh of the big worm.
She just kept rolling over him, leaving behind a big, extremely disgusting pile of goo. The
foul smell of the squashed Taxxon nearly knocked me out.
The human was still just standing there. He said, "An elephant?" Like he couldn't even think
a bout it being real.
Rachel wrapped her trunk around his middle.
Yeah, we heard Rachel say. An elephant
89
The man screamed. I guess he figured out it was real.
Rachel threw him through the air. I never saw where he landed.
"Quick!" I yelled at Marco. "Morph!"
"Nice work, Rachel," Marco said. "Remind me not to ever make you mad."
I focused on the tiger. I knew his DNA pattern was in me. I thought of him, lying there in his
habitat at The Gardens wishing he were back in the jungle, hunting and taking down his prey.
I guessed maybe he wouldn't mind the use I was making of his DNA. This wasn't quite a
jungle, but it would have to do.
More Hork-Bajir coming! Rachel said.
Rachel turned to face them, tusks ready.
I felt the morph begin. The hair grew from my face. The tail squirted out behind me. My arms
bulged and rippled. They were massive! My shirt ripped. I fell forward onto my hands, now
my front legs.
The power!
It was electric. It was like a slow-motion explosion. I could feel the power of the tiger
growing inside me.
I watched claws, long, wickedly curved, tearing, ripping, shredding claws, grow from my
puny human hands. I could feel the teeth sprouting in my mouth.
My eyes looked through the darkness like it was broad daylight.
But most of all, the power! The sheer, incredible power.
I was afraid of NOTHING!
Hork-Bajir were running at me, their arm blades slashing at the air.
I opened my mouth and I roared. The Hork-Bajir stopped dead in their tracks.
That's right, my little Hork-Bajir friends, the human part of my brain thought. Time to meet
the tiger.
The muscles in my back legs coiled up. I bared my teeth and gave them another roar loud
enough to make the ground quiver.
I leaped through the air, claws outstretched.
90
CHAPTER 25
I sailed through the air and struck the closest Hork-Bajir in the chest.
Down he went with me on top of him. He rolled over and tried to get up. He was fast. I was
faster.
He struck at me with his razored arm. I ducked under the blow. My left paw swung, so fast
even I couldn't see it. It left four oozing tracks across the Hork-Bajir's shoulder.
Another Hork-Bajir! Wrist blades, elbow blades and talons whizzed. They were like a pair of
lawn mowers on full throttle.
And still I was faster. I can't even remember what happened next. All I have is this image of
the tiger  of me  with claws slashing and jaws snapping. I was a whirlwind of orange fur
and black stripes.
The Hork-Bajir fell back. I roared. They turned and ran.
On one side I saw Rachel. She lifted a Hork-Bajir up on her tusks and tossed him back over
her shoulder like he was a doll.
And then I saw Marco. Big Jim's massive body was ripping its way out of Marco's slight
frame.
Just call me King, Marco said. King Kong.
The truth is, like Cassie said, gorillas are very gentle, peaceful, quiet creatures. The truth also
is that they are strong. Real strong.
Basically, compared to a gorilla, a man is something made out of toothpicks.
Now, Hork-Bajir are pretty large creatures. They stand about seven feet high and are built for
trouble. But Marco swung one big gorilla fist and hit the nearest Hork-Bajir in the stomach.
The Hork-Bajir went down. Hard.
I roared. Rachel trumpeted. Marco lifted the Hork-Bajir up and tossed him aside like a rag
doll.
The rest of the Hork-Bajir turned and ran.
Now! I shouted. Before they get organized again!
We charged. Rachel just plowed right through some of the small sheds and buildings like
Godzilla heading for Tokyo.
Marco came loping along, swinging his massive forearms, punching anything that got in his
way. Whatever he punched stayed down:
And I ran right down the middle, looking for any Controller dumb enough to mess with me.
We reached the cages. The people and Hork-Bajir inside shrank back from us. They were
almost as afraid of us as they were of the Controllers. Let's face it  a rescue party made up
of an elephant, a, gorilla, and a tiger is not what they'd been hoping for.
91
Marco began ripping at a lock on one of the cages. The lock gave way. The door flew open.
Marco did something very human to reassure them. He made a little bow, then crooked his
finger at them as if to say come on out
Tom was the first out. He looked scared and mad and determined. I was going to send him a
thought message, telling him who I was, but suddenly there was Rachel, screaming in my
head.
Jake! Rachel said. Look. Cassie!
Cassie was nearly at the end of the infestation pier. The Hork-Bajir and Taxxon guards were
still sticking to their duties. As I watched, another human was shoved headfirst into the Yeerk
pool.
Cassie is next! I cried.
Don't worry, Marco said. We'll take care of Tom. Go. Go before they do it to her!
I hesitated for only a second, as a thousand thoughts went through my head.
Later I would think about that moment. Think maybe... maybe... if only...
I broke into a run. I had to get to her!
As I watched, the two Hork-Bajir on the pier grabbed Cassie by the arms.
"Nooooo!" she cried.
I tore at full speed. I leaped over Taxxons. I dodged around Hork-Bajir. I practically flew.
But I couldn't really fly. Not the way Tobias could.
I saw him high, high up in the cavern. Down he came.
Like a bullet.
The talons came forward. Tobias hit the first Hork-Bajir at about fifty miles an hour. He
swooped away, leaving the alien clutching at the slimy mess where his eyes used to be.
That was all Cassie needed. She broke away and ran back down the pier.
I finally got there and went after the remaining Hork-Bajir-Controller.
Morph! I yelled to Cassie. Morph and head back for the stairs!
She looked at the other humans and Hork-Bajir behind her in the line. "Run! All of you, run!"
They did. Cassie plowed into the panicky crowd. Moments later a black-maned head
appeared above the shoulders of the crowd. Cassie had become a horse and was racing for the
stairs.
92
I started after her, racing back around the pool toward Marco, Rachel, Tom, and the crowd of
hosts they'd freed from the cages.
The Controllers were starting to get organized. A group of Taxxons were slithering out to
stop Cassie and me. Both the Hork-Bajir and the Taxxons were carrying weapons now.
Up and over! I said to Cassie as we neared the line of Taxxons.
Up and over! she yelled back.
I leaped. Cassie jumped. Side by side, we sailed over the startled Taxxons. They fired their
hand-held Dracon beams, but too late. The beams sizzled the air behind us and we blew past.
I could see Rachel's towering gray bulk just a-head. The stairs were near. I saw Marco with
Tom.
We were going to make it!
And then he stepped out daintily from a group of Hork-Bajir.
He seemed almost harmless in his Andalite body. A gentle half-deer, half-human-looking
creature with bluish fur and an extra set of eyes on comical stalks.
Visser Three didn't look all that scary. Not compared to the Hork-Bajir, the Taxxons, or even
our own Earth-animals.
But Visser Three had an Andalite body. He had an Andalite's power to morph. And he had
been all over the universe acquiring the genetic patterns of monsters like nothing ever seen
on Earth.
A Taxxon slithered up beside Visser Three and spoke. It was a weird, half-whistling sound.
"Ssssweer trrreeesswew eeeesstrew."
Visser Three said nothing. He just looked at me with the vertical slits that were his eyes.
This Taxxon fool says you are wild animals, Visser Three said. He wants to know if he
and his brothers can eat you. He laughed silently. But I know you are not animals. I know
who and what you are. So. Not all of you Andalites died when I burned your ship.
It took me a couple of seconds to realize what he meant. Then it hit me. Of course! He
thought we were Andalites. He'd guessed that we were morphs, not real animals. And he
knew that the Andalites were the only species with morphing technology.
I compliment you on getting this far. But it will accomplish nothing. Because now, my
brave Andalite warriors, it is time. Time to die.
He began to morph.
I acquired this body on the fourth moon of the second planet of a dying star. Like it?
I realized I'd been wrong to be hopeful.
93
We were not going to make it.
94
CHAPTER 26
From Visser Three's Andalite body, the creature grew. Tall as a tree, towering over even
Rachel. Eight massive legs. Eight long, spindly arms, each ending in a three-fingered claw.
And from the place where the top set of arms grew came the heads.
Heads. Plural. Eight of them. This creature had a thing for the number eight.
Even the Hork-Bajir-Controllers backed away. Even they didn't want to be near Visser Three
when he morphed this way.
But the Taxxons edged in closer, crowding around their leader like a pack of hungry dogs
looking for table scraps.
I was frozen in terror. Stunned. Even the tiger that was a part of me was confused and
worried.
I had started to think that with our morphed bodies we could take on anything. But we
couldn't take on this monster. Not and survive.
Run! I yelled to the others. Up the stairs!
Cassie nudged two of the humans from the cages and tossed back her head. They figured out
what she wanted and climbed on her back. Then she galloped toward the stairs.
Yes, run, Visser Three crowed. It makes a more challenging target.
Then, Visser Three struck.
From one of the heads a round, spinning ball of flame erupted. A ball of flame that flew like a
missile.
It skimmed through the air and splatted against the back of one of the women riding Cassie.
"Ahhhh!" She fell off, screaming and rolling around to put out the flames. Cassie kept going
with only one rider. She reached the base of the stairs.
Target practiced Visser Three laughed. He fired fireball after fireball, one head after
another.
One singed my shoulder and flew past. One hit Rachel in the ear and made her scream in my
head and trumpet in terror.
The air was full of fire.
We have to get out of here! Marco yelled.
Yes, run! Run for the stairs! I repeated. Rachel! Get moving! Clear a path!
A big swarm of us was heading for the stairs, but the Taxxons had closed in around us.
Anyone that got away from Visser Three was swarmed over by the Taxxons.
I saw Tom out of the corner of my eye. He was swinging his fists at a pair of Taxxons that
were circling around him. Tom couldn't hurt them, but he was trying just the same.
95
Rachel ran over and plowed into one of them, crushing him beneath her tree-trunk legs.
Marco threw his arms around the second Taxxon and twisted till it split open, spilling its
putrid guts all over the floor.
Rachel had hit the bottom few stairs and stopped. Elephant bodies are great for some things.
But they are useless for climbing stairs.
Morph back! I told Rachel.
She began to shrink almost immediately, but there wasn't time to wait until the morphing was
complete. Rachel started up the stairs as a shifting mass of gray and pink, part human, part
elephant, staggering on weird, half-finished legs and dragging a shriveled trunk that made her
pretty face into something awful to see.
We ran. But it was impossible.
By the time we had climbed a few dozen stairs, there were only a few free humans and two
free Hork-Bajir with us. The rest had all been recaptured or burned.
A fireball exploded at my feet and I snarled. But still we retreated.
We were a hundred feet up the stairs when the last two freed Hork-Bajir were brought down
by the Visser's fireballs. They fell in flames.
The Visser was climbing the stairs now, all alone. He was so big he barely fit on the stairs. I
knew when we reached the point where the walls closed in around the stairs that we would be
safe from Visser Three. Glancing up, I saw that Cassie was almost to safety above us, with
one human rider.
The rest of us, along with Tom and a pitiful handful of freed humans, were bunched together.
Visser Three began pelting the staircase ahead of us with fire. We were trapped. Fire ahead.
Visser Three himself behind.
"No," I heard a familiar voice say. "No, you filthy creep. You aren't going to win this time."
It was Tom.
All alone, he charged at Visser Three, armed with nothing but his fists.
One of the Visser's arms came down and swung at him.
Tom! I cried. My tiger body roared with all its might. But the sound was lost in the noise
of crying humans and whistling Taxxons.
I saw Tom stagger from the Visser's blow.
I saw him fall from the edge of the stairs.
I went a little crazy.
96
I was on the Visser before I knew what was happening. On him, digging my claws into his
flesh. I twisted up and behind one of his eight heads.
The tiger in me knew what to do. I sank my teeth into his neck and clamped my powerful
jaws and held on.
Another head turned back and aimed a fireball at me. I dodged the first fireball. The second
burned my flank. I jumped clear.
The Visser roared in pain. I roared in hatred.
And we ran, ran, ran up those stairs with a hundred nightmares on our heels.
97
CHAPTER 27
We ran. Exhausted and burned and terrified, we ran.
Visser Three had made one mistake. He was too large in his morph to follow us much farther
up the stairs.
I heard Visser Three yell something as we finally got away. He said, I'll kill you all,
Andalites. Run away, it doesn't matter! I'll kill you.
Actually, I think it did matter. We hadn't exactly destroyed Visser Three, but we had come
out of it alive, we Animorphs.
The final count was exactly one human freed  the woman who rode Cassie's back up out of
that hellish pit.
And Cassie had gotten away clean. It had been the suspicious Controller policeman who had
grabbed her. He was the only Controller to know her name, where she lived, and that she had
been spying on The Sharing.
Cassie said we didn't have to worry about him anymore. She didn't want to talk about what
had happened to him.
As for Tom... My brother.
Tom was not freed.
I was lying in my own bed, shaking and shivering and crying from the aftereffects of terror,
when I heard him come home later that night.
He never knew that I was the tiger. He never knew how close I had come to freeing him. He
was a Controller again. The Yeerk was in his head once more.
Cassie and Marco and Rachel and I had all made it up those stairs. We had emerged into the
hallway of a school that would never seem the same to us again.
And Tobias? He survived, too.
It was almost morning when I was awakened from dead sleep by feathery beating on my
window.
I opened it and Tobias flew in.
"You made it," I said. "Oh, man, you had me scared. I figured you were still trapped down
there. I mean, I thought you could probably find somewhere to hide in that cavern, but I knew
you'd been morphed for a long time. I was worried you wouldn't be able to morph back
without getting caught. It's good to see you."
Good to see you, too, Jake, he said. How are the others?
"Alive," I said. "Alive. I guess that's all that counts."
98
Yes. That is all that matters.
"Come on, Tobias," I said. "Morph back. You can stay here. I'll even let you have the bed. I
could sleep on nails, I'm so tired."
He didn't say anything. And I guess in my heart I'd known it all along. I just didn't want to
admit it.
"Come on, Tobias," I said again. "Morph back."
Jake... 
"Just come on, back to human now, dude. No more flying tonight."
I hid in the cavern for a while, he said. They didn't see me. But I had to stay out of sight
till I could get out. Jake... it took too long. Too long. More than two hours.
I just stared at him. At his laser-focus eyes, at his wicked beak and sharp talons. And at his
wings. At the broad, powerful wings that let him fly.
I guess this is me from now on, Tobias said.
I knew there were tears falling down my cheeks, but I didn't care anymore.
It's okay, Jake. Like you said, we're alive.
I went to the window and looked up at the stars. Somewhere up there, around one of those
cold, twinkling stars, was the Andalite home world. Somewhere up there was... hope.
They'll come, Tobias said. The Andalites will come. And until then... 
I nodded and wiped away my tears. "Yeah," I said. "Until then, we fight."




Chapter One
My name is Rachel. I won't tell you my last name. None of us will ever tell you our last
names. Whenever I do use a last name, it's a fake. Sorry, but that's the way it has to be. And
we won't tell you the name of our town, or our school, or even what state we are in. If I told
you my last name, the Yeerks would be able to find my friends and me. And if they ever find
us, it will be the
end.
They might kill us. Or worse.
Yes, there really is something worse than death.
I've seen it. I've heard the cries of despair from those doomed to be slaves of the Yeerks.
I've watched as the evil gray slugs writhe and squeeze in through the ear and take over what
was a free human being.
There are five of us. Just five: Jake, Cassie, Marco, Tobias, and me. Marco came up with a
name for us, for what we are now. He called us Animorphs.
I guess that's as good a name as any for what we are. Mostly, I still just feel like a nor mal kid
you know? But I guess normal kids don't turn into elephants or bald eagles. And normal kids
don't spend their free time fighting to save the world from the nightmares called Yeerks.
That day, the sun was bright. It warmed the earth below us. Warm air rose in an invisible
bubble, a thermal. The thermal pushed up beneath our wings and we circled higher and
higher and higher, till it almost seemed we could touch space.
Somewhere up there in cold space, up in orbit, was the Yeerk mother ship. Perhaps right over
our heads.
The Yeerks were parasites. In their natural state they were just big slugs who lived in a
sludgy pond called a Yeerk pool. But the Yeerks have the power to take over other bodies.
They have enslaved many races throughout the galaxy -- the Taxxons, the Hork-Bajir, and
others. And now they had come to Earth, looking for more bodies to control.
Who was there to try and stop them? Well, off in space, there were the Andalites. But the
Andalites were far away, and it would take them a long time to come to rescue the people of
Earth.
On Earth, no one knew of the Yeerks. No one but five kids who were having fun being birds
and riding the thermals.
I looked over at my friends. Some were a little way below, some were higher up. Jake was
flapping his wings a little more than the rest of us. He had adopted a falcon morph. Falcons
don't soar quite as well as hawks or eagles.
Tobias was the smoothest flyer. That was partly because red-tailed hawks are natural
acrobats.
Partly it was because Tobias had much more practice flying than the rest of us.
3
Too much practice.
Okay, Tobias, you were right. This is the coolest thing in the world, I said.
Want to try a dive? It's amazing, he said.
I wasn't exactly sure that I wanted to dive, but what could I say? I don't usually turn down a
challenge. So I said, Sure. 
Follow me. 
Tobias bent his wings back and plummeted toward the ground like a bullet.
I tucked my wings back and went after him.
The ground came rushing up at me.
I was falling! Falling, with nothing at all to stop me from splatting right into the ground!
It was like a nightmare.
We were going like sixty miles an hour, as fast as a speeding car. Sixty miles an hour, aiming
right for the ground.
But even though it was scary, it was also way cool.
Forget surfing. Forget skateboarding. Forget snowboarding. You haven't had a thrill till
you've ridden the thermals a mile into the air and then gone hurtling straight down at
maximum speed.
Air streamed past, just like when you open the car window and you're going really fast. It
was like being in the middle of a hurricane. The leading edge of my wings was battered and
vibrating. I felt my tail making dozens of tiny adjustments, moving a single feather one way
or the other to keep me pointed straight.
But one wrong move and I could have tumbled end over end. At this speed, if I suddenly
tumbled I feared I could break a wing. A broken wing this high up was a death sentence.
Tobias! I just realized something.
What?
This isn't like being an elephant. If I got in trouble as an elephant I could morph back to my
human body. But I'm a long way up. If I morphed back to my human body...  I didn't
finish the sentence. But I suddenly had this vision of me, real me, Rachel, dropping like a
stone toward the hard ground below.
I guess Tobias could sense the fear that was building in me.
4
Let the eagle do the flying, Tobias advised. Relax and let the eagle's mind do the
thinking. She knows what she's doing. 
I'm glad one of us does, I said nervously. It's strange when you're in a morph. You have
the animal's brain in with your own. Usually you can control that animal intelligence. But not
always. And sometimes you have to learn to let go, to let the animal take charge.
I relaxed. Instantly the vibration lessened. I felt more stable. The eagle was in charge and
Tobias was right: The eagle knew how to fly.
Then, to my amazement, I saw something go zipping right past us, faster than either me or
Tobias. It was Jake. His peregrine falcon's smaller wings made it harder for him to float on
the thermals. But those same wings made him unbelievably fast in diving. It was almost like
Tobias and I were standing still.
Yaaaaaah ha ha!! Jake yelled in our heads.
I would have smiled, if I'd had a mouth. Jake is like me. He loves excitement and adventure
and being a little crazy. Maybe we're so alike because we're cousins.
Also, we're both a little competitive, I guess.
It bothered me that he was a faster diver than I was. Just like it bothered him that I could soar
better.
I guess that sounds ridiculous, huh?
Zzzziiinnnngggg!
Something went right by my head.
You hear that? Tobias asked.
Yeah, I sure did, I said. What was it?
I don't know. 
Instinctively, I pulled up out of the dive, straining every muscle in my wings as I opened
them, and felt the shock of wind resistance. It was like opening a parachute.
The rest followed my lead. We were still a few thousand feet up, but much closer to the
ground than we had been.
Zziiiinnnnngggg!
I felt something go right through my tail feathers.
Hey, someone down there is shooting at us! I said.
I can see them, Cassie said. She and Marco had joined up with us. They had both morphed
the same osprey. It was hard to tell them apart because you can't really tell where thoughtspeech
comes from. Two guys, over in the woods. They have a rifle.
5
I can't believe this! I was really mad. I'm an endangered species. I'm a bald eagle! What's
the matter with those creeps?
He's getting ready to shoot again, Marco reported. I can see him taking aim.
As soon as you see the flash of the rifle, dodge hard right! I yelled.
A normal eagle or hawk or falcon would not have been able to figure that out. But we weren't
just raptors. We still had our human intelligence.
There are times to let the animal take over. There are other times when that superior human
intelligence comes in handy.
There! They fired! Jake yelled.
Instantly I turned a sharp right. The bullet went whizzing by harmlessly.
You know what? I don't think I like those guys, Tobias said.
Tobias has special reasons for disliking anyone who would shoot at a bird.
Me neither, I agreed.
I have an idea. 
I explained what I wanted to do and the five of us flew off, out of range of the shooters.
When we were far enough away, we went into a steep dive, down, down, faster and faster
toward the trees.
I thought I was scared, diving from high up. Now I was diving at lower altitude, aiming
directly at the trees. This was a whole new level of terror. With my eagle's eyes I could see
the bark on the trees. I could see ants on the bark of the trees. It was like those trees were
right in front of us.
I hoped the eagle knew when to pull out of the dive. If I slammed into one of those trees at
sixty miles an hour, I was Spam.
Then, at just the right split second, like a perfectly trained squadron of fighter jets, we opened
our wings and swooshed into the trees.
Unbelievable!
Ah haaaah! I heard Marco yell. I don't know if that was fun or just insane!
It was like some video-game nightmare. We kept most of the speed from the dive and now
we were zooming through the trees so fast that tree trunks were just a brown blur all around
us.
Tree! Bank left.
6
Tree! Bank right.
Tree!
Dozens of feathers made the slightest individual adjustments. Muscles in my wings trimmed
the angle of attack a millimeter one way, a millimeter back.
Tree! Tree! Treetreetreetreetree!
Yaaaaaaaaah! I yelled, half from terror and half from the total, out-of-control thrill of it.
In and out. Around and through. Zoom.
ZOOM!
Suddenly, there they were, just ahead in a clearing. Two teenage creeps sitting in the back of
a pickup truck. One guy had a blond ponytail.
The other one wore a baseball cap. They were a hundred yards away, like being all the way
down a football field, but my eagle eyes were so good I could count their eyelashes.
The guy with the ponytail had the rifle. The other guy was drinking a beer. They were still
scanning the skies, looking for us.
Guess what, morons? I thought as we raced at them. We're not up there anymore. We're right
here...
In...
Your...
FACE!
They didn't even have enough time to look surprised before we struck.
As a bald eagle, I was the biggest of the five of us. I could carry the heaviest load.
I raked my talons forward.
I opened them wide.
"Tsseeeeeer!"
Tobias's hawk let loose an intimidating shriek.
My talons hit the gun barrel and closed on it.
Tobias slashed the ponytail guy's head with his own talons. Ponytail shouted in pain and
surprise and loosened his grip on the rifle.
"Hey!" the second guy yelled.
7
Zoom!
I was out of there with the rifle in my talons.
With the additional weight of the rifle, it was a struggle getting any altitude.
"That bird has your gun, Chester! And that other one stole my beer!"
I glanced over and saw Marco. At least I think it was Marco. He had the beer can in his
talons, half-crumpled.
They're way too young to be drinking, Marco said in his most parent-like voice.
I heard the ponytail guy complaining down below.
"That ain't right. It ain't right that no bird should take my rifle like that."
I caught a little breeze and gained just enough altitude to get above the trees. But I was
having a hard time. My wings were beating the still, dead air of the woods and not getting
very much lift. I scraped the top of a tall pine tree and emerged from the woods, still flapping
hard to carry the weight of the rifle, I made it out toward the beach, over the low cliffs at the
water's edge.
The blessed thermals were there. They lifted me up, up and out over the water. I relaxed,
letting the warm wind carry me higher.
I dropped the rifle about a mile out in the ocean. I figured any jerk who would shoot at a bald
eagle didn't need a gun. Marco dropped the beer with amazing precision right into a trash
barrel. He looked as proud as he would have if he'd just thrown the winning basket in the
NBA championship.
lt's been almost two hours, Cassie warned us as we lazily drifted back toward shore.
Two hours is the time limit. If you stay in a morph for more than two hours, you're trapped.
Forever.
8
Chapter Two
There's an old, run-down church no one uses anymore not far from the beach. It has a bell
tower, although the bell is gone. We flew there. That's where we had started from. Our
clothes and shoes were still piled there.
Four pairs of shoes for the five of us.
Cassie, still in her osprey body, peered down at her watch lying on the floor. Good. An hour
and a half. We should try never to go over an hour and a half. 
We began to morph back into our human bodies.
Morphing takes concentration. When you're going from human to animal, it's harder. You
really have to focus. But going back to human is easier.
I focused on my human self. I formed a picture of myself in my mind -- tall, thin, with blonde
shoulder-length hair. I focused especially on the hair, because I didn't like my last haircut. It
was uneven at the bottom. Not that it mattered. I just wished I could do something about the
hair when I morphed. Unfortunately, morphing doesn't work that way.
The changes began quickly. The feathers that covered me began to melt. They ran together
like hot wax. In some places when my skin reappeared, it would have this beautiful feather
pattern for a few seconds.
My yellow bill sucked back into my mouth to become white teeth. That part sort of itched. It
made me want to grind my teeth a few times.
My lips grew out around my teeth. My eyes went from pale gold to my normal blue. My legs
grew quite a bit, from about three inches to normal size.
I looked over at Jake and saw the same things happening to him. Let me just tell you --
watching someone morph is not a pretty sight. It's the kind of thing that would give you
screaming nightmares if you didn't know it was going to be all right.
When Cassie morphs, she always does it kind of artistically. Like when she changes into a
horse, she does it so it doesn't look totally creepazoid -- she has a natural talent for morphing.
If there is such a thing. The rest of us just let it happen however it happens. The results can
be disturbing.
I happened to see Marco at the moment where his hairy boy legs came shooting out of this
little bird body and I yelped. "Yahh! Gross."
"Ay, nyew donk luk so good yourself, Rachel."
His mouth was morphing even as he spoke, so the first few words were garbled and the last
were normal.
I think what he said was "Hey, you don't look so good yourself, Rachel." He was probably
right. I was glad I didn't have a mirror.
9
My tongue grew fat in my mouth. My eyesight became faded and dim. The eagle's mind
evaporated, leaving me all alone in my head.
My wings became arms. My talons became toes. The scaly yellow eagle legs became my
own legs, only they were still all scaly at first.
"Nice look, chicken legs," Marco said. "Do those come in extra crispy, too?"
I smiled at him. "You're not one to talk, Marco." I pointed down at the floor. See, his legs had
changed back, but he still had huge osprey talons instead of feet.
As my skin began to appear, so did my morph ing outfit. Fortunately, after a few tries, we
had all learned to morph some very minimal clothing.
Usually nothing more than skintight workout clothes or leotards. Not enough to go walking
around in, but enough to keep us all from dying of embarrassment when we morphed in front
of each other.
I checked out my friends. They were mostly normal again, with just a few remaining hints
that they'd been birds a minute earlier.
Jake is kind of a big guy, strong-looking, with brown hair and serious, dark eyes -- although
at the moment, his eyes were shining with excitement. Sometimes being in a morph just
totally breaks you out. Jake was a lizard once, and he still hasn't gotten over the fact that he
ate a live spider. But I guess he enjoyed being a falcon, be cause he was babbling on and on
about how great it was.
"That was so absolute!" he said. "It's like now, being back in a human body, I feel like I'm
handicapped or something. I feel like I'm glued to the ground."
"And blind," Cassie agreed. "Human eyes are so lame for seeing things far away."
She grinned and spread her wings. She had managed to keep her wings till the very end. Now
she looked like some strange angel. Oddly, the look worked for her. The osprey's five-foot,
gray- and-white wings were incredibly cool.
"Do you think you could fly?" Jake asked her.
He looked a little awestruck.
Cassie laughed. "No, Jake. This body weighs about eighty pounds. These wings aren't built
for that kind of weight."
She morphed her wings into arms in about three seconds and laughed gaily.
Marco shook his head. "Great. When we morph we look like some mad scientist's genetic
experiment gone totally crazy. And Cassie gets to look like an angel."
Cassie and I have been friends for a long time, although to look at us, you wouldn't think
we'd hang out together. Cassie is casual to the extreme. The girl just doesn't care about
clothing or style. I swear she would wear overalls to a wedding if someone didn't stop her.
10
Cassie lives on a farm and her whole family is massively into animals. Her dad used the barn
to run the Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic, which is a kind of hospital for injured animals. It's
always full of birds and skunks and opossums and coyotes and every other animal you can
think of.
Cassie's mom is a vet, too. She works at The Gardens, this huge zoo and amusement park. So
maybe Cassie was just born with an instinct for understanding animals. All I know is she's
always finished morphing while the rest of us are still looking like creepy half-human, halfanimal
monsters.
As for me, well, it's not that I'm Miss Fashion or whatever, but I do like nice clothes.I guess
that, plus the way I look, makes a lot of people think I'm stuck-up or something. People do
think I'm pretty. But to me that's just an accident, you know? Looks are not the important
thing. It's what's in your head that counts, and that's what I concentrate on.
Of course that's another area where Cassie and I are a little different. I guess she would say,
"No, it's what's in your heart that counts." She's a natural peacemaker. If there's ever a hassle
within the group, it's usually me and Marco that caused it, and Cassie who got us all calmed
down.
"Personally, I'm glad to be back to my regular body," Marco said. "The flying part is great,
but it's not a good idea to be able to see that well."
"Why?" Jake asked.
"Look, Jake, how many times have you been walking around the mall or whatever, and you'll
see a girl who seems good-looking from far off, but when you get closer it turns out she's a
skank? I mean, if you could see this well all the time -- "
"Excuse me?" I interrupted. "I'm sure I didn't hear you say what I thought you just said."
"I wasn't being sexist," Marco protested. "It goes both ways. See, from far off, I look taller
than I am."
Marco is a little self-conscious about being short. He has long brown hair and a dark
complexion, and most girls think he's really cute. But being small bothers him.
"Your problem isn't with people seeing you too well," I said. "It's with people hearing you
too well. You look like a fairly smart guy. Then you open your mouth..."
Marco just grinned. Marco lives to annoy people. He really is extremely smart and basically
nice, underneath it all. It's just that the boy loves to provoke people.
Marco and Jake are best friends, even though Jake is serious and thoughtful and always
trying to do what's right, while Marco is sarcastic and temperamental and is the most
reluctant of the Animorphs. Marco still thinks we should just give up the battle against the
Yeerks and try to stay alive.
But with Marco you never know if he really believes that, or is just saying it to be contrary.
11
"Well, let's get out of here," Jake suggested. "I have homework to do."
"Me too," I said. "And I have gymnastics class this afternoon and I'm totally unprepared."
Cassie sighed. "It's such a drag. The chores and the homework all come rushing back as soon
as we change back into our boring human selves."
As soon as she said it, Cassie bit her tongue. She cast a regretful look to Tobias.
See, while all of us had changed back, Tobias had not. Tobias was still a hawk. Tobias, who
had once had unruly blond hair and eyes that seemed hurt and tender and hopeful all at once.
Tobias had been trapped while trying to escape from the hellish nightmare of the Yeerk pool.
He had stayed more than two hours in that morph.
We had all returned to our human forms, but Tobias was still a hawk.
Tobias will always be a hawk.
12
Chapter 3
We all walked most of the way home together, feeling worn out. The flying was a little tiring.
And morphing always takes a lot out of you.
Tobias flew high overhead. He didn't really participate in the conversation. It's hard for
him. See, he can think-speak to us and we can understand him, but when we're in human
shape we can only talk in the normal way. He can't hear us unless he's close by, and he can't
be close and still fly.
"This morphing thing would be so excellent if it weren't for the whole thing with the Yeerks,"
Marco was saying. "I mean, if it were just normal, we could really use these powers."
"To do what? Fight crime?" Jake asked.
Marco looked at him with a mixture of pity and amusement. "Fight crime? Who are you,
Spiderman? I'm talking show business. Movies! TV shows! I could go on Letterman. I could
be an entire episode of Stupid Pet Tricks all by myself."
"You're right," I said, batting my eyes so he would know I was kidding, "you already have
the stupid part down."
"We'd be hot in horror movies," Cassie said.
"Or how about as stuntmen?" Jake suggested. "One of us could jump off the tallest building
and it would be totally realistic. Then we just morph into a bird on the way down and fly
away."
"Now I'm really mad at the Yeerks," Marco said. "They're getting in the way of my showbiz
career. I could be a millionaire. I could be trading funny lines with Dave. I could have
beautiful Hollywood supermodels all over me."
"Uh-huh," I said, with a wink at Cassie. "Lots of women love animals. But sooner or later
you'd have to change back into your actual self, Marco. And then, boom, they'd be outta
there."
We walked along the boulevard that goes by the construction site. It's this huge area of halffinished
buildings with rusted earthmovers and cranes and backhoes scattered around. I guess
it was originally going to be a shopping center, but for some reason they never finished it.
We didn't take the shortcut through the construction site, like we would have in the old days,
though. See, it was at this construction site that we saw the Andalite prince's damaged fighter
land. It was here that the Andalite warned us of the Yeerk conspiracy and gave us our special
powers.
It was also here that we saw the Yeerk commander, Visser Three, murder the Andalite prince.
Visser Three is the only one of the Yeerks who has our same power to morph. Visser Three is
an Andalite-Controller, meaning he has an Andalite body. A human-Controller is a Yeerk
with a human body. A Taxxon-Controller is a Yeerk with a Taxxon body. You get the
idea.
13
Visser Three is the only Yeerk to ever capture an Andalite body. So he's also the only Yeerk
who can morph.
That night at the construction site, he morphed into some creature from a far-off planet, a
huge, horrible monster. And then he took the Andalite and...
You know what? I really don't want to talk about that.... You'll have to ask Jake.
We all fell silent as we passed by the site.
Then I noticed that Cassie had stopped walking and was just standing there. I went back to
her and realized that she was crying.
"Are you okay?" I asked.
She shook her head. "No. Are you?"
I sighed. Flying around in the sky had been a wonderful distraction. But my head was still
full of awful memories. "I guess not," I admitted.
"Last night I had a terrible nightmare about the Yeerk pool. I was back down there. Down
there in that vast open cave. And I was hearing the screams and cries of the people being
dragged to the pool."
Cassie nodded. "You know what's worse than the screams? The way they stop screaming
once the Yeerk is in their heads. Once they've become Controllers. Then you know they are
slaves again. Lost."
"Like Tom."
We both turned. It was Jake. He and Marco had seen us stop and had come back.
Tom is Jake's brother. Tom is a human-Controller -- a human being enslaved by a Yeerk in
his head. We'd found the Yeerk pool and gone down into that hell to get Tom. We'd failed.
We'd barely escaped with our lives.
Cassie put her arm around Jake's waist. "Someday we'll save Tom," she said.
Jake kind of stroked Cassie's head. I guess he got embarrassed, because he instantly pulled
away. Cassie didn't mind. She knows how guys are about showing their true feelings.
I looked across the construction site and saw Tobias come fluttering down out of the sky. I
couldn't see where he landed, because that part of the site is hidden from the road, but I knew
right where he was -- on the spot where the Andalite had died. Somehow, in those brief
moments when the Andalite had been with us, Tobias had formed some kind of special bond
with him.
We started walking again.
14
"We need to find another way to get at them," I said angrily. It bothered me, imagining
Tobias back in that maze of never-finished buildings mourning for the Andalite.
"Get at who?" Marco asked suspiciously.
"The French, Marco," I said sarcastically.
"Who do you think? The Yeerks, duh."
"Whoa, whoa, whoa!" Marco said. "We tried that, remember? We went down into the Yeerk
pool after them and got our butts kicked. Yeerks ten, humans zero."
"So you figure you should just give up?" I demanded.
"We lost one game," Jake said. "You don't quit the sport just because you lose one game."
"Some game," Marco said bitterly. "Some sport."
"We didn't lose, anyway," I said. The others looked at me like I was crazy. "Look," I
explained, "I know we didn't save Tom, and we sure didn't stop the Yeerks. But we gave
them a reason to be afraid, at least."
"Yeah, they're terrified of us. Visser Three probably can't sleep at night, he's so worried about
five kids," Marco said sarcastically. "Look, Visser Three doesn't think we're a threat. He
thinks we're lunch."
"He doesn't know who -- or what -- we are," I pointed out. "The Yeerks are convinced that
we're Andalite warriors because they know that we can morph. And they know that we found
the Yeerk pool, and infiltrated it, and took out a few of their Taxxons and Hork-Bajir while
we were at it.
I think they're probably a little nervous, at least."
Jake nodded. "Rachel's right. But just the same, I don't think we want to try to go back to the
Yeerk pool. Besides... the door is gone."
We all stopped and stared at him.
He shrugged. "Look, I just wanted to see if the door still worked, okay? Just in case. But it's
not there anymore."
The door leading down to the Yeerk pool had been hidden in the janitor's closet of our
school.
There were dozens of doors to the underground Yeerk pool, spread all over the city, but this
was the only one we knew about.
"So we find another way to get at them," I said. "We can follow Tom again, when it's time
for his Yeerk to return to the Yeerk pool." Yeerks have to go to the pool every three days.
They drain out of their hosts" heads and soak up Kandrona rays.
15
"No. We leave Tom out of it," Jake said firmly. "If we call attention to him in any way, the
Yeerks may decide he's trouble for them. They may decide to kill him."
Marco gave me a sour look. "This is what you want to keep doing? Risking our lives and the
lives of everyone we know? For what?"
"For freedom," Cassie said simply.
Marco didn't have a smart answer to that.
"There's still Chapman," Jake said.
Chapman is our assistant principal. He's also one of the most important human-Controllers.
He runs The Sharing, the club that helps recruit unsuspecting kids into being hosts for the
Yeerks.
"If there were some way for us to get close to Chapman..." Jake let the words hang in the
air. He carefully didn't look at me. But I knew what he meant. He'd obviously been thinking
about this for a while.
"Melissa?" I asked.
He nodded. "It's a possibility."
See, Melissa Chapman, Assistant Principal Chapman's daughter, is one of my closest friends.
Or at least she used to be. The last few months, she'd been acting very strange toward me.
Like she didn't care anymore. We take gymnastics together. Actually, we got into it at the
same time. You know -- something to do together.
"I don't like using a friend that way," I said.
"Oh, suddenly the mighty Rachel is weaseling," Marco crowed. "You don't like using your
friends? You're pretty willing to risk my life."
"Sure, Marco, but who said you were my friend?"
"Very funny," Marco said. But at the same time he looked a little hurt.
"Kidding, Marco," I said. "Just kidding. Of course you're my friend. But you're an Animorph.
Melissa is just an innocent bystander."
"I wish I had never come up with that word," Marco said. "Animorph. Gimme a break."
"Rachel, Melissa's father is one of the main Controllers," Jake said gently, ignoring Marco.
"She's in this whether she likes it or not."
I felt a bitter taste in my mouth. Jake was right, of course. Chapman was the logical lead to
follow. And Melissa was our way to get close.
It made sense. It made sense for me to betray an old friend.
16
It also made me feel like dirt.
17
Chapter 4
The next day after school I headed for my gymnastics class at the YMCA, which is just
across from the mall. They have a big indoor pool, so the entire building always smells of
chlorine. Except for the weight room, which just smells like sweat.
My class is taught in a smaller room, with blue mats covering the floor. We have balance
beams and uneven parallel bars and a vaulting horse with a springboard.
I'm okay at vaulting and the parallel bars, but I'm pretty lame at the balance beam. To be
honest with you, it kind of scares me. It takes such total concentration.
It's not one of those real serious gymnastics classes. I mean, none of us is going to be going
to the Olympics. When I started out, I had dreams of being the next Shannon Miller. But then
I started to grow. I'm pretty tall now, for my age. People look at me now and say, "Oh, you're
going to be a model," not "Oh, you could be a gym nast."
Most of us in the class are too tall or too heavy to ever be serious gymnasts. We do it for fun
and for exercise. I do it because I've always thought of myself as kind of clumsy. My mom
says I'm not, but that's how I feel anyway.
Besides, it's just cool, hitting the little spring board and flipping through the air to bounce off
the vaulting horse and stick the landing. Not as cool as flying, maybe, but fun just the same.
Melissa Chapman was in the locker room changing into her leotard when I came in. She's the
exception to the rule in our class. She does look like a gymnast. She's small and thin, even
though she doesn't starve herself like some fools who want to get into gymnastics. She has
pale gray eyes and pale blonde hair and pale skin. She looks like one of those solemn elves in
a Tolkien book. At first glance she looks delicate, but when you look a little closer, you see
strength there, too.
Melissa gave me the kind of not-very-warm smile she always gives me lately. Like she was
distracted, or thinking about something more important.
"Hey, Melissa," I said. "How's it going?"
"Fine. How about you?"
"Oh, pretty much the same old thing." That was a lie, of course. But what was I going to say?
Yeah, Melissa, same old same old. Been turning into animals and fighting aliens. You know,
the usual.
Melissa didn't say anything else. She just adjusted her leotard and started to do a few little
stretches. That's the way it was. We said hi, but not much more. It used to be we were very
close. She was my second best friend, after Cassie.
"Melissa, I was thinking... maybe you'd like to walk over to the mall with me after class? I
have to buy a new pair of sneakers."
"The mall?" She stammered a little, and then started blushing. "You mean, go shopping?"
18
"Yeah. You know -- walk around and look at stuff and check out the cute guys and diss the
snotty women at the perfume counters."
I tried to sound casual, like it was no big deal. In the old days, it would have been totally
nothing. But now Melissa looked like a trapped animal.
When had Melissa and I gotten to be such strangers?
"I'm, um, kind of busy," Melissa said.
"Oh. That's cool. I understand."
But I didn't understand. Not at all. She started to walk away. I was going to let it go, but then
I remembered: This wasn't just about a friend who had drifted away. This was about her
father, one of the leaders of the Controllers. One of our most dangerous enemies.
I grabbed her arm. "Melissa, look... I feel like we've kind of gone in different ways, you
know? And I miss you."
She shrugged. "Okay, well, maybe we could get together sometime."
"Not sometime, Melissa, that's just you blowing me off. What's going on with you?"
"What's going on with me?" she echoed. For a moment a look of extraordinary sadness
darkened her eyes and tugged downward at the corners of her mouth. "Nothing is going on
with me," she said. "We'd better get out there or Coach Ellway will have a fit."
She pulled her arm away.
I just watched her go. I felt like a complete and total jerk. Something had happened to
Melissa. And I hadn't even noticed. She was my friend and something had changed in her,
and I hadn't seen it. I'd just gone my own way.
And now I was only acting like a concerned friend. The truth was, I was only paying
attention for my own reasons.
I wasn't able to concentrate on the lesson. Not concentrating when you're doing gymnastics
can be painful. I slipped on the balance beam and banged my knee so badly I cried.
Melissa was the first one to rush over. And for about ten seconds she was the old Melissa.
But by the time I'd gotten back up, she was off across the room in her own little world again.
It was right then that the terrible suspicion started.
Melissa had been acting very strangely. Her father was a Controller.
I looked at her from across the room and felt a chill.
Was she one, too? Was my old friend Melissa a Controller?
19
I didn't go shopping after my lesson. I didn't really feel like it. Melissa's eyes, the way she
had looked at me, kind of killed my urge to shop.
I was supposed to head over to the mall, then call my mom when I was done to come pick me
up. That was the plan. But since I didn't feel like mall-crawling I just headed home. Alone.
With the sky growing dark as rain clouds moved in.
It was stupid and careless of me. But I guess I was preoccupied with other things. Although
at least I had the sense to stay out of the construc tion site.
I was walking down the sidewalk that runs along the boulevard when suddenly I realized that
a car had pulled up just a little way down the sidewalk from me.
A guy got out. He looked like he was in high school or even college. He also looked like
trouble.
I should have turned around and run back to ward the mall. But sometimes I don't always do
the sensible thing. Sometimes I regret not doing the sensible thing. This was one of those
times.
"Hey, baby," he said. "Want to go for a little ride?"
I shook my head and clutched my gym bag close. What an idiot I was to be so careless!
"Now, don't be stuck-up, sweet thing," he said. "I think you'd better get in the car."
The way he said it didn't sound like an invitation. It sounded like an order. Now I was really
afraid.
I clutched my gym bag close as I passed him.
"Don't ignore me," he hissed.
He reached for me and missed. I walked faster.
He was behind me.
I broke into a run.
He ran after me.
"Hey. Hey, there! Come back here."
I had been stupid going out alone. But fortunately, unlike most people, I wasn't helpless.
As I ran, I focused on something completely different. I concentrated on an image in my
mind.
Then I felt the change begin. My legs grew thick. My arms grew big, bigger. I could feel
myself growing large. Large and solid. I felt the squirmy sensation of my ears becoming thin
and leathery.
20
But it wasn't enough to just look creepy. This guy had made me mad. I wanted to scare him
half to death.
My nose suddenly began to sprout. Then, from my mouth, like two huge spears, the tusks
began to appear.
I figured that was about enough. I broke my concentration, which stopped the morph.
I stopped suddenly. The creep barreled right into me.
He was not going to like what he was about to see.
21
Chapter Five
I wanted to tell the jerk to step off. What I wanted to say to him was, "So, you still want to go
for that ride?"
What I really said was "HhhohhHEEEEERRR."
The guy stopped dead. He just stared.
What he saw was me, halfway through morphing into an African elephant. I had about a third
of a trunk and most of my huge fanlike elephant ears. My legs were like stumps. My arms
looked like Arnold Schwarzenegger's, only gray. And my tusks stuck about a foot out of my
mouth. Just to make things extra weird, I still had my normal hair and my normal eyes.
Suddenly, the guy wasn't interested in hassling me.
"AAAAAHHHH!"
He turned. He ran. For a minute he forgot he even had a car. Then he turned around and
jumped in through an open window.
He started the car and took off.
He was definitely breaking the speed limit as he tore out of there.
I concentrated again and began to reverse the morphing process, going back to human shape.
I had been wearing a loose sweater and leggings, which was good. They had both stretched.
But my shoes had been split open by the sudden growth of my elephant feet.
It had started raining, so the trip home was going to be very unpleasant. "Oh, great!" I
muttered.
"I have got to remember to kick off my shoes before I morph into an elephant."
Just then, a second car pulled up and came to a stop. The window rolled down.
"Hey, Rachel." It was Melissa. I recognized the voice. "Do you want a ride home?" She didn't
sound very excited by the idea.
I looked through the car window, past her. Chapman was behind the wheel.
A wave of sick fear swept over me. Had he seen what I'd just done? If he had, then I was
dead. My friends were dead.
"I'm... I'm fine," I said. "I could use the exercise."
"Nonsense, young lady," Chapman said, sounding like his usual assistant-principal self. "It's
beginning to rain. Get in."
What was I supposed to do? I forced a smile. It wasn't easy. "Thanks," I said.
Melissa was in the front with her father. I sat in the back. I tried not to shiver. I tried not to
stare at the back of Chapman's head. That's how it is when you're around a Controller. You
22
know that evil slug is right there in the Controller's head, attached to all his nerve endings.
Controlling the human brain. Dominating it.
It's hard not to stare when you think of what is squeezed inside that skull.
"When we were stuck back at the red light it looked like some guy was bothering you,"
Melissa said. "Then he ran off. Was he bothering you?"
"Um... no," I lied. "He was... he was just picking up something he dropped by the side
of the road."
Pathetic! I was such a lame liar.
I saw Chapman's eyes watching me in the rearview mirror. He looked like normal old
Chapman. That's the problem with Controllers. There is no outward clue. They look so
normal.
"He went running off like the hounds of Hades were after him," Chapman said.
"Did he?" I said in a squeaky voice. "I wasn't looking. I guess it was the rain. That's probably
why he was running. There. You can turn left there."
"I know where you live," Chapman said.
I almost swallowed my tongue. Was that a threat? Did he suspect? Did he guess? Was he
looking at me strangely?
Or was I just being paranoid?
He pulled up in front of my house. My heart was hammering, but I was determined to act
casual. "Thanks for the ride, Mr. Chapman," I said. "Hey, Melissa, I was totally serious about
us getting together, okay?"
She nodded. "Sure, Rachel. Absolutely."
I closed the car door behind me. I had escaped. I was alive. I'd probably just been imagining
things.
Then I heard Melissa call out to me. "Hey. What happened to your shoes?"
I looked down. My shoes were in tatters, the result of my feet growing from a size six to a
size three hundred in about five seconds flat.
"See?" I said, as lightly as I could. "I told you I needed to go shopping."
Melissa just looked puzzled. Her father stared at me with an expression I could not read.
I was shaking like a leaf when I walked into my house. I headed upstairs to my room and
stuffed my ripped shoes into the trash. Only then did I go back downstairs and say hi to my
mom.
23
She was at the kitchen table, half hidden by a pile of buff-colored books. My mother's a
lawyer, and she brings work home a lot so she can be around me and my two little sisters.
She and my dad are divorced. I only get to see my dad a few days a month, so mom feels
guilty when she isn't there for us.
"Hi, honey," she said. Then she got her "suspicious mother" look. "How did you get home?
You didn't walk, did you? You were supposed to call me."
"Melissa and her dad gave me a ride," I said. Well, it was the truth. Sort of.
She relaxed and made a point of closing her book. "Sorry. You know I worry about you."
"Where are Jordan and Sara?"
"They're in the family room watching another one of those scary shows. Of course, tonight
Jordan will be sleeping with her night-light on and Sara will end up in my bed, no doubt. I
don't know why they like things that frighten them. You were never that way."
It almost made me laugh. I felt like saying, well, Mom, I don't have to watch things that are
scary, I am scary. Should have seen me a little while ago with tusks sticking out of my mouth
and a three-foot-long nose.
What I really said was, "So, what's for dinner?"
My mother winced. "Pizza? Chinese? Any thing else you can order over the phone? I'm
sorry, but I have this brief and I have court in the morning."
"Mom," I told her for maybe the thousandth time, "I don't mind pizza. Sorry, but your
cooking isn't all that great, so it's no big deal ordering pizza."
"Well, at least get some veggies on it," she said.
After dinner I called Jake.
"Do you want to come over?" I said. "I got that new CD, if you want to listen to it."
There was no CD, of course. It's just that we always have to be careful. Like I said, Jake's
brother, Tom, is a Controller. He could be listening on the extension. Then I called Cassie
and Marco and told them the same cover story.
When they arrived I told them about Melissa, and then I told them about my little run-in with
the creep. I did not tell them about Chapman driving me home. I don't know why. But when I
saw the way Marco exploded, I was glad I hadn't told them the whole story.
"Oh, that was dumb! Dumb! DUMB!" Marco said. "What if that guy is a Controller?"
"He wasn't a Controller," I said\ scornfully. "Why would the Yeerks want to make a
Controller out of a punk? They want people in positions of power."
"We don't know that for sure," Jake said. "Tom isn't in a position of power."
24
"And how about people driving by in their cars, or looking out of the windows of their
homes?" Marco asked. "And what if he runs and tells someone about this girl who suddenly
sprouted a trunk and tusks?"
"No one is going to believe a lowlife like that," I said.
"His friends won't believe him," Marco said poisonously, "but a Controller would believe
him. A Controller would know what it meant."
Yes. A Controller would know what it meant. A Controller like Chapman. Or even Melissa,
if she was one of them.
I felt sick. It was like my whole life was nothing but lies. Lies to Melissa. Lies to my mother.
Now I was lying by not telling the others the whole truth.
"Okay, I screwed up," I muttered.
"You sure did!" Marco crowed. "You screwed up so --"
"Marco, let it drop," Jake said. "Rachel knows she made a mistake. We all make mistakes."
Marco rolled his eyes.
Cassie gave me an encouraging smile. "It was dumb putting yourself in that position, Rachel.
You need to be more careful. But still, I'd have paid my next ten allowances to see the look
on that guy's face."
"The important thing is that it doesn't sound like Rachel can use Melissa to get close to
Chapman," Jake said. "Not if she's a Controller herself. And not if she's going to continue
being weird to Rachel."
"I guess we'll have to find another way," I said quickly. "I mean, we know where Chapman's
office is. We know where his house is. Maybe we could just morph into some small animals
and hide out."
"Small animals like what?" Marco asked. "When Jake turned into a lizard he got stepped on.
He lost his tail. Besides, what are you going to morph into? A cockroach?"
We all shuddered at the thought. The smallest, strangest thing anyone had morphed so far
was when Jake had done the lizard. It creeped him out big time. A roach would be even
worse.
"The problem with being a cockroach," I said, "aside from the fact that it is too gross to
believe, is that roach senses might not even be useful to us. Can a roach "hear" in a way that
would make it possible for us to understand what we're hearing?"
We all looked at Cassie. She's sort of our expert on animals.
Cassie held up her hands. "Oh, come on. Like I know how a cockroach sees and hears? We
don't take care of roaches at the rehab clinic."
25
We all sat there feeling glum for a few minutes. But I wasn't going to let it drop. This was
about more than just striking a blow at the Yeerks. I had to find out if Chapman suspected
me. If he did, we were all in terrible danger.
I happened to glance over at my desk. There was my math homework, still not done. That
didn't make me feel any better. But then I looked at the photos I had mounted in one of those
big frames with six different holes. One was of me with my mom and dad on a whitewater
rafting trip we took. One was of me visiting my dad at his job -- he's a weatherman on TV.
We were grinning in front of a map of storms. Another picture was of Cassie and me riding
horses side by side, with Cassie, as usual, looking like she'd spent her entire life in the saddle,
and me looking like a total dweeb.
But the picture that got my attention was one taken a couple of years ago of Melissa and
me.
I got up and went over to take the frame down.
I stared hard at the picture.
"What?" Jake asked. "What is it?"
"It's me and Melissa," I said. "It was like her twelfth birthday, or some birthday, anyway, and
we were out on her lawn playing with the present her dad gave her."
"So what?" Marco asked.
"So..." I passed him the photograph. It showed me and Melissa in shorts. And between us a
small black-and-white kitten. "So her present was a cat."
26
Chapter Six
"Look! A kitty door!" Jake pointed.
"Where?" Marco asked.
"See the lines of light? At the bottom of the regular door?"
"Oh, yeah," Marco said. "I wish the moon were out. I can't see a thing."
The four of us were cowering behind a hedge that bordered the Chapmans' lawn. They lived
in a pretty normal-looking suburban home. You know: two stories, a garage, a lawn. Nothing
to make you think that the person who lived there was part of a huge alien conspiracy to take
over the world.
"Let me just ask you this," Marco whispered. "Why did it have to be Chapman? I was afraid
of Chapman even before we found out he was a Controller."
"You're not still upset over that detention he gave you?" I asked. "Look, if you're going to
listen to your CD player in math class with an earphone hidden under your hair, you have to
remember not to start singing along."
"Yeah, that was only slightly stupid, Marco," Jake agreed.
"I still say Chapman never would have given me a whole week's detention if he was totally
human."
"I have a question," Cassie said. "How do we get Melissa's cat to come outside?"
We all looked at her.
"Good question," I admitted.
"I mean, we could hide here in the bushes for a long time. But sooner or later the neighbors
are going to notice."
What does the cat look like?
Tobias was sitting perched on a nearby tree branch. He was close enough to hear us.
I tried to remember. "It's name is Fluffer, I remember that much. Fluffer McKitty."
"You've got to be kidding." Marco, of course.
I tried to remember back to when I used to hang out with Melissa. "It's black and white. You
know, in patches."
l'll look around. Maybe it's already outside. 
Tobias spread his wings, swooped silently down over our heads, and flapped away into the
night.
27
You know what we need?" I said. "We need another kitty. We should have thought of that.
Then we could have the second cat call out to Fluffer."
Marco turned to stare at me. "Meowfluffer, comeoutmeow, meow come and play meow?"
"Tobias morphed a cat very early on, didn't he?" I asked.
"Yeah," Jake said. "His first morph. The first morph any of us did."
"Rachel, you need to remember if you go in there tonight that you have to stay in cat
character," Cassie said.
"Most people would just think it was weird if a cat acted strangely. But Chapman may be
able to guess what's going on if Fluffer suddenly starts acting un-catlike."
"So you're saying I shouldn't try eating with a fork or changing the channels on the TV?"
Everyone laughed -- quietly and nervously, but it was laughter just the same.
Suddenly Tobias dropped out of the sky, then drifted over us in a lazy circle and called
down, Got him. 
He settled back on the branch. He was really an amazing animal, when you just looked at him
as a bird and didn't think about him being a boy trapped in there. I mean, the gaze of a hawk
when it is looking right at you is incredibly intimidating.
Gentle Tobias now had an expression that looked totally ferocious.
"You're kidding. You found Fluffer?" I asked.
Hey, it's easy. Spotting prey is what I do. Or what a hawk does, anyway. Actually, there are
maybe six or eight cats running around the neighborhood. Also, three dogs and an amazing
amount of rats and mice.
"Rats?" That got Marco's attention. "Rats? Here? This is suburbia. I mean, it's a lot better
than where I live. They have rats?"
There are rats everywhere, Tobias said. Rats and mice and all kinds of plump, juicy...
He fell silent, embarrassed.
"Get a grip, Tobias," Marco said. "Don't start eating rats, all right? I don't know if I can have
someone who eats rats for a friend."
Sometimes Marco is funny. Sometimes he goes too far. This was one of those times. "Shut
up, Marco," I growled.
"I ate a live spider," Jake pointed out. "Does that mean you and I can't be friends?" From his
tone of voice I could tell he was angry, too.
None of us knew what Tobias was going through.
28
None of us had ever been in morph for more than two hours. Tobias had been a hawk for
more than a week.
Marco realized he'd been a jerk. "Well, yeah, I guess you're right," he muttered. "Besides, I've
been known to eat eggplant. So I guess I can't criticize."
That was an apology, or as close as Marco could get to an actual apology.
The cat we're looking for is just a half block away, Tobias said. Follow me. 
He flew off, but kept low. We took off after him. Even flying at minimum speed, Tobias was
too fast for us to keep up with, so he had to circle back again and again. We had a hard time
keeping him in sight.
"This doesn't look too strange," Cassie joked. "The four of us running down the street looking
up in the sky."
There, Tobias called down. See that yard with the two trees?
"Yeah. Just to our left?"
That's the one. The cat you're looking for is stalking a mouse, right behind the trunk of the
nearest tree. 
"Okay, we can't all go traipsing over some stranger's yard," I pointed out. "I'll go with Cassie.
"
Marco held up the kitty carrier we had brought along. "Don't you need this?"
"Not yet. I'll grab Flutter and bring him back over here. You two guys just stand here,
looking casual."
Cassie and I stepped onto the lawn. The house was dark. Maybe no one was home. That
would be good.
"Go left," I suggested to Cassie. We circled the tree.
"Hey, Flutter," I said in a high, talking-to- animals voice. "Here, kitty kitty. Remember me?"
"There he is."
"I see him." I squatted down and held my hand out toward the cat. "Hey, Fluffer Fluffer. It's
me, Rachel."
Flutter flattened his ears back along his skull. He looked from me to Cassie and back again.
"Come on, Flutter, it's me. Come on, boy."
"He's a male? He's a tomcat?" Cassie asked.
"Yeah, I think so."
29
"Oh, wonderful," Cassie moaned. "Please tell me he's been fixed, at least."
"Have you been fixed, Flutter McKitty?" I cooed. "Why do we care?" I asked Cassie.
"Because pound for pound, a tomcat is like one of the toughest, most dangerous little things
around."
"Who, Flutter? My little kitty friend Flutter?"
"Even if he is fixed, a male cat, out at night in hunting mode?" Cassie shook her head. "We
should have worn gloves."
"Oh, come on. He's a sweet kitty cat." To demonstrate just how sweet Flutter was, I reached a
hand for him.
"Hhhhhhssssss!"
In a movement too fast for my human eyes to see, Fluffer swiped out with one paw. Three
bloody scratches appeared on the back of my hand and Fluffer shot straight up the tree.
"Owww!" I stuck my injured hand to my mouth.
"Gloves would definitely have been a good idea," Cassie said.
"How are you guys doing?" Jake whispered, just loudly enough for me to hear him.
"Wonderful," I said through gritted teeth. "I'm bleeding and Fluffer is up the tree."
I heard Marco giggle. I expected that. But then I heard Jake giggling, too.
I looked up and saw two glittering yellow- green eyes glaring down from the dark tree.
"This was supposed to be the easy part," I said. "I figured, okay, we go and acquire
Flutter's DNA, and then the hard stuff begins."
"We have a cat up a tree," Cassie said dolefully. "You know how hard it is to get a cat
down out of a tree?"
"I have a plan," I said. "Tobias, are you up there?"
Right above you. But I'm not going to try and snatch an angry tomcat down out of a tree. 
"That's not what I was going to ask," I said. I took a deep breath. This night was turning
weird real fast. "What I need is a mouse."
30
Chapter Seven
Got something for you. A baby mouse. A mean baby mouse. It keeps trying to bite me.
Tobias flew in a low, tight circle overhead, disappearing behind the tree branches, then
reappearing. Are you ready?
I took a deep breath. I gave him a wave. Sure, I was ready. Why wouldn't I be ready to have a
hawk hand me a mouse? Just your normal kind of thing to deal with.
Tobias flew low and slow. I held out my hands, cupped together. With amazing precision and
perfect timing, he deposited the mouse in my hands.
"Don't let it bite you!" Cassie warned. "Rabies."
"Wonderful," I muttered. "Just one more fun aspect of this night." Actually, I was glad for the
warning. The mouse was squirming in terror, trying to get away. I could feel its tiny little
mouse legs scrabbling against my palms.
"You should all get rabies shots," Cassie said. "Seriously. I already have mine. But if we're
going to be handling wild animals... In the mean time, be careful to keep his teeth away from
you."
"I wasn't planning on feeding him my finger," I said.
"Hey, wait." Cassie pried open my hands to get a better look. "That's not a mouse. That's a
shrew. See the eyes? They're too small. And the tail is wrong. That's not a baby mouse,
Tobias, it's a full-grown shrew."
Sorry. Is that bad?
Cassie shrugged. "I don't know. I just know it isn't a mouse."
"Wait a minute," Marco said, beginning to grin. "Rachel is going to become a shrew?
How will we know when she's changed? How do you become what you already are?"
Everyone was too nervous to find the joke very funny. We felt kind of stupid, standing
around on some stranger's lawn playing with rodents. I mean, there are times when the whole
thing just seems so utterly insane, you know?
"Okay, I have to concentrate on acquiring, so everyone shut up," I said.
Acquiring is what we call it when we absorb a sample of the animal's DNA. The DNA is the
stuff inside the cells that sort of serves like a how-to manual for making the animal.
When you acquire, you have to think hard about the animal, focusing on it and blocking
everything else out. Then the animal kind of goes limp, like it's in a trance. It takes just about
a minute.
It was easy to focus on the shrew, what with it squealing in terror and squirming to get out of
my hand.
31
But it was gross, definitely gross. I know there's nothing really wrong with shrews, but still.
They freak me out a little.
When I was done, I opened my eyes. "Okay, little shrew, thanks for your help. You can go
now."
"I'm not sure this is a good idea," Jake said doubtfully.
"Really?" Marco was sarcastic. "You're not sure it's a good idea for Rachel to turn into a
shrew in order to lure a vicious cat down from a tree so she can morph into that cat and sneak
into the assistant principal's house? What worries you about that plan?"
Cassie looked worried, too. "You know, Rachel, usually a cat will play with a mouse a little
bit.
But sometimes they don't. Sometimes they go right for the neck bite. The mouse -- or the
shrew -- dies instantly."
Be careful, Rachel, Tobias said. I'll be watching, but be careful. I don't want anything to
happen to you.
He "said" it so only I could hear. I could tell, because nobody else reacted.
I looked up at Tobias and winked. I knew he would see it. I rubbed my hands together.
"Okay,
let's do this."
I concentrated once more on the shrew. The shrew was now a part of me. I don't know how it
works, but it does. Somehow, thanks to the Andalite technology, the DNA of that shrew was
stored away inside me. It was like having a map to guide me as I transformed. Not that I had
a clue how I was able to do it.
The first sensation was of shrinking. It's a long, long trip down from being five feet tall to
being less than an inch tall. It's like falling. Except that you can feel the ground under your
feet the whole time.
One minute I was looking Jake and Marco and Cassie in the face. The next minute their faces
seemed to be zooming high up above me. I was falling down the length of their bodies. It was
like they were huge skyscrapers and I had jumped off the roof or something.
My outer clothing fell around me like a big, collapsing circus tent.
It made a slight grinding noise as my backbone collapsed into a size smaller than my little
finger. There was the disturbing, not-quite-pain sensation that goes along with some morphs.
Like you knew it should hurt, but it didn't quite.
I could feel the tail sprout from my tailbone. A long, hairless tail. Not at all attractive.
My legs practically disappeared, they were so small. I was a chubby little ball of fur no more
than two inches long, with four tiny feet.
32
Then the fear kicked in. The shrew's fear.
It hit me so hard I began to shake. I rattled with terror. I quaked with terror.
I was surrounded! Predators everywhere! I could smell them. I could see them -- huge,
looming, slow-moving creatures standing over me.
"Rachel? You okay down there?" It was Cassie. She lifted the folds of my clothing off of
me.
I heard the voice and sort of understood it, but it was more like distant thunder. It didn't really
mean anything. At least not to the shrew.
It was looking for a way out. Its brain might have been terrified, but it was also amazingly
smart. It was evaluating every possible escape route. It was measuring the distance between
the three sets of legs. One set of legs moved slightly. I was off like a shot.
Running! Running!
Blades of grass seemed six feet tall. Twigs were like fallen trees that I had to scramble over.
My little feet moved with incredible speed. I scooted past a beetle that seemed to me to be as
big as a dog.
"Rachel, you have to get control!"
I knew they were right. I even sort of understood what they meant. But the terror was so
strong. The urge to survive was so powerful.
And at the same time there were other feelings. Hunger. I smelled nuts. I smelled dead flesh.
I even smelled the maggots squirming on the dead flesh.
And I wanted them. I know it's too gross, but I wanted to eat those maggots.
Heavy pounding footsteps behind me! I turned sharply and ducked under a bush. The steps
went barreling by before stopping and turning back toward me.
They were faster than I was, but not as agile. I could get away. I could get away and find that
dead smell and gorge!
Rachel, it's Tobias. The shrew is in control. You have to assert yourself! Tell it
to stop running.
 Fear! Hunger!
Rachel, listen to me. You're getting away from us. You have to take charge. 
Fear! Hunger! Run!
Grass and twigs and dirt. Low scratchy branches over my head. The smell of food. The smell
of a dog that had urinated on this bush.
33
More loud footsteps and far-off rumbling voices yelling. They were trying to catch me. But I
was fast!
I was clever!
But not clever enough. I ran out from under the bush.
Like a shadow inside of a shadow, I felt it descend on me. Terror like nothing I'd felt before
swept over me. Something deep, deep inside my shrew brain cried out.
It was the ultimate fear! The ultimate horror! It was the enemy I could not defeat!
And it was coming for me!
34
Chapter Eight
I dodged, but too slowly. Huge talons closed around me and suddenly my little feet were
running in air.
Okay, Rachel. It's okay. It's just me. I have you. 
The voice was in my head. I understood the words. It cut through the terror at last. I held onto
that voice.
Relax, Rachel. 
I looked down and with my dim shrew eyesight saw the shadows shooting past down below.
I have you, Rachel. Try to be calm. Think about something human. Think about school.
Remember school?
School? Yes. I remembered school.
Quite suddenly the shrew mind lost the battle for control. It was like a switch had been
flipped. I was in charge. I knew what I was. I knew who I was.
I'm okay, Tobias, I said. You can set me down.
He circled around and landed with perfect gentleness on the ground.
Did my talons hurt you?
No. I don't think so. I'm fine. 
"You okay, Rachel?" Jake's voice.
 Yes. Boy, that was totally different than the elephant brain. Or the eagle. They're both so
calm and mellow compared to this mind. 
"It's like Jake's lizard," Cassie suggested. "He had a panic reaction, too. The other animals we
morphed were all kind of big, dominant animals -- gorilla, tiger. My horse was skittish,
though."
Look, let's just do this and get it over with, okay? I said. I'm not enjoying the shrew
experience. That was the understatement of all time. I could still smell death and hear the
thousands of feasting maggots. And to me those things still meant dinner. I was horribly
hungry.
"Are you sure you're going to be able to maintain down there?" Marco asked. I saw him
peering down at me from a million miles up. "You still look a little nervous. Your tail is
twitching and your little nose is sniffing like crazy."
Yeah, I know. I'm still nervous. Let's just do this. You'll have to take me back to the tree
where Fluffer is. I don't know what direction it is. 
35
Before I could object, Marco reached down and scooped me into his hands. He held me up
and looked into my eyes. "I've never seen you look lovelier, Rachel. Very cover girl."
We walked down the block. Marco set me down at the bottom of the tree where Fluffer was
still hiding out on a high branch.
You guys had better back off a little. I said.
"Not too far," Jake said. "We have to be able to get between you and Fluffer fast."
Oh, I can kick Fluffer's butt, I said, joking. I guess I felt a little embarrassed about having
let the shrew take control of me.
"Uh-huh," Marco said dryly. "Cat versus mouse. Who would you bet on?"
"Haven't you ever seen Itchy and Scratchy?" Cassie asked. "Mouse, definitely. Besides, she's
not a mouse."
Let me tell you something: It is no fun sitting around in a shrew's tiny body, waiting to see
whether a huge cat is going to decide to climb down and kill you. It is one of the least fun
things I've ever done. I had the shrew brain under control, but that didn't change the fact that
the shrew was about as scared as a shrew can be. Between being snatched up by a hawk and
now waiting to see if the shrew's other deadly enemy was going to attack... I mean, the shrew
was definitely in a state of panic.
She was not a happy shrew.
I was so preoccupied thinking about the shrew's hunger that I missed what happened next. I
didn't even notice until I heard the sound of scraping tree bark just an inch over my head.
Fluffer was dropping through the air right on top of me!
I froze!
Jake and Marco did not freeze.
Marco grabbed Fluffer in mid-pounce. Fluffer rewarded him with a nasty slash of his claws.
Marco yelled and almost dropped the cat. Jake grabbed Fluffer by the nape of the neck and
Cassie ran up with the animal carrier.
The three of them managed to stuff the squalling, hissing, slashing Fluffer into the carrier and
close the door.
I was already morphing out of the shrew body as fast as I could.
"I'm bleeding!" Marco cried.
"We're all bleeding," Cassie said matter-of-factly. "I told you guys: Kitties can be nasty when
you get on their nerves."
I was shooting up from the ground, regaining my normal body.
36
"Ugh! Ugh! I'm never doing that morph again," I said, as soon as I had a normal tongue and
lips. I looked over my shoulder to make sure I didn't still have that creepy tail. Nothing. I was
me again. I was in my morphing outfit and with no shoes on, but I was human again.
I shuddered. The memory of the shrew's brain and its fear and hunger made my flesh creep. I
was fighting a powerful urge to throw up. I felt sick in a way that is mostly in your head.
Jake looked at me and shook his head. "I should have done it. I should have used my lizard
morph to lure the cat down from the tree."
I shook my head. "No. That freaked you out."
"And now you're the one who's freaked out," Jake said. "But don't worry, you'll get over it.
Mostly. At least you didn't eat a spider."
"Yeah. Look, I'm just tired, okay? Let me acquire this pain-in-the-butt cat and get on with
this."
"Are you still up for it?" Cassie asked. "Acquiring two new morphs in one night?"
"I shouldn't have let you do the mouse. Shrew. Whatever," Jake said. He was still looking
guilty.
"Look, it was my idea, right? Besides, since when do you let me do things? What are you, my
master? I don't think so. Come on." I squared my shoulders and put on a brave smile. "Let me
see how Fluffer likes me, now that I'm bigger than he is."
I guess Fluffer was tired of causing trouble. He was actually asleep in the cat carrier.
Sleeping like nothing at all was going on.
A typical cat. He even purred as I acquired him.
When I was done, I noticed Cassie smiling at me.
"What?" I asked her.
"I was just thinking how you look like the same old Rachel, but now you also have an
elephant, a shrew, an eagle, and a cat inside you. That's four morphs. That's more than any of
us." She looked thoughtful. "We don't really know very much about this morphing thing still.
I wonder if there is a limit to how many morphs you can do."
"I guess we'll find out," Marco said darkly. "Probably at the worst possible time."
I wondered if they were right. It was definitely a strange, powerful feeling, knowing that I
could become four very different animals. Strange and powerful and disturbing. Inside of me
I had animals that ate each other. It wasn't a good image.
Suddenly I felt exhausted. "Look, guys... I've acquired Flutter now. But maybe we should do
the rest of this tomorrow night. I'm... I don't know if I'm at my best right now."
37
"Another night," Jake agreed. He looked relieved. I think he was worried about me. That's the
way Jake is.
"I guess we can let Fluffer go now," Cassie said. She opened the carrier and the cat
climbed out cautiously.
I watched him run off into the night.
"Probably going off to kill your shrew," Marco speculated.
The idea made me shudder all over again.
38
Chapter Nine
"Aaaaaaaahhh! Aaaaah! Aaaaaaaaaah!"
"Wake up. Rachel, wake up!"
"Aaah!" "Oh. Oh. Oh." I sat up. I was gasping for air. It was dark, but I could just make out
Jordan's face. She was shaking me awake.
I felt my face. Lips. Eyes. Nose.
I patted myself down frantically. Human. I was human. No fur. No tail. Human.
The details of the dream came rushing up to my consciousness.
"Oh, no," I moaned. I threw back the covers and stumbled to my feet. I staggered toward the
bathroom door. The bathroom connects my room and the room Jordan and Sara share. I tried
to turn on the light but missed the switch. I dropped to my knees in front of the toilet and
threw up.
Jordan kept saying, "Are you all right, Rachel? Are you all right? I better get Mom."
"No," I said, as soon as I could talk.
"No, I'm fine. Don't wake Mom up."
Fortunately, little Sara can sleep through anything.
I brushed my teeth and drank some water. I looked sheepishly at Jordan. She looks nothing
like me. I guess I look more like my dad, and Jordan is like this smaller version of my mom,
dark hair and dark eyes. She looked pretty scared.
"I'm okay," I said again. "Just a bad dream. I guess it made me kind of sick, is all. But I'm
fine now."
Jordan relaxed a little. "Must have been some dream."
"I guess so. I can't even remember it now. You know how it is. Dreams fade away so you
can't even remember them."
"I can't believe you would just forget a dream that made you scream and hurl."
I shrugged. "I've never been very good at remembering dreams. You better get back to bed."
She looked at me solemnly. "I know I'm just your little sister by two years, but you would tell
me if something bad was happening to you, right? I mean, I wouldn't tell Mom or anyone.
You could trust me."
I smiled and drew her into a hug. "I know I can trust you. If anything bad was going on, I'd
tell you." It was a lie, of course, and the lie made me feel even worse. I trusted Jordan. I knew
in my heart that she was not a Controller.
39
Of course, that's just what Jake had said about Tom.
I hugged my sister a little closer. I hated the way suspicion had crept into every part of my
mind. I hated the way I wasn't sure, not really, to tally sure, that I could trust her.
"Good night," I said. "Thanks for rescuing me from that nightmare. Whatever it was."
She started to walk away. Then she turned, lit from behind by the garish bathroom light.
"Before you started screaming, you were yelling something."
"What?" I asked, afraid of the answer.
She looked puzzled. "I think it was "maggots." Something like that."
I forced a shaky smile. "Good night, Jordan."
I crawled back into my bed. The pillow was soaked with sweat. The sheets were clammy.
Maggots. Squirming, crawling, busy little white maggots. They were all over a piece of
rotting meat and fur. In my dream it was a dead cat. A dead cat covered with vermin eating
the decayed flesh.
A shrew was getting in on the feast, eating the dead flesh and the living maggots with equal
enjoyment.
In my dream I knew: I was that shrew.
40
Chapter Ten
"You look tired," Jake said the next morning. We took the same bus to school.
"Thanks," I said grumpily.
"Didn't get enough sleep last night?"
"I guess not, if I look as bad as you say."
"I didn't say you looked bad, I just said you looked tired." He hesitated. He glanced over his
shoulder, checking to see whether anyone was listening. Fortunately, the noise level was
pretty high in the bus. Jake lowered his voice and leaned close to my ear. "You didn't get
creeped out by the shrew, did you?"
"Why? Just because I'm a girl, you think the shrew bothered me more than it would have
bothered you or Marco?"
"No, that's not it at all," he said earnestly. "It's just... see, when I did the lizard
morph, that bothered me. I had nightmares -- "
"Nightmares?" I said it too loudly. Then I lowered my voice back to a whisper. "Nightmares?
"
"Oh, yeah. Definitely. When I morphed the tiger I had dreams, too, but not nightmares."
"What kind of dreams?"
He smiled. "Kind of cool, really. Stalking through a dark forest at night. I was hunting
something. It was like I wanted to catch it, but at the same time it was like if I didn't catch it
that would be okay, too. Because just running and creeping and then running some more
through the woods was the best thing in the world."
I nodded. "I felt like that after the elephant morph. It was this incredible feeling of being huge
and invincible. Like I could never even possibly be afraid of anything."
"But the shrew was different, wasn't it? Same with the lizard."
"I guess it's the different characters of the animals. Maybe some are good matches for our
human brains. Maybe others aren't." I looked out the window for a while. Then I said, "You
know what scares me?"
To my surprise, Jake nodded. "Yeah. You're afraid that someday we might have to morph
into bugs."
I shuddered. "I don't think I'll be willing to do that. I think that may be too much."
"Well, your next assignment is a cat. Tobias was a cat. He said it was amazingly cool. He
liked it. Just like I really enjoy being a dog. Sometimes when I'm feeling depressed, I really
wish I could just morph. Dogs know how to have fun."
41
The bus pulled up in front of the school. "An other day of school. Normal life." I looked over
the crowd of kids milling around on the lawn and on the steps. I spotted Melissa.
"See you later, Jake," I said. "Thanks."
"No problem. We're all in this together."
I made my way down the bus aisle and ran to catch up to Melissa. But when I got close
I saw that her eyes were red and swollen. She'd been crying.
I didn't know what to do. In the old days I would have just run right up to her and asked what
was the matter.
"Hey, Melissa, how's it going?"
She looked at me, confused. "What?"
"I said, how's it going?"
She shook her head slowly, like she couldn't believe I was even talking to her. "What do you
care?"
"Melissa. Of course I care. What's wrong?" Her eyes went kind of blank. She seemed to be
looking at nothing but the air right in front of her face.
"What's wrong? Everything is wrong. And nothing is wrong. But just the same, every thing is
wrong."
"Melissa, what are you talking about?" "Forget it," she said. She started to walk away.
I grabbed her arm. "Look, you can talk to me. I'm still your friend. Nothing has changed."
"Leave me alone," she said grimly. "Everything has changed. Everyone has changed. You
stopped being my friend. And my mom and dad... "
"What?" I pressed her.
The bell rang loud and shrill.
"I have to go." She pulled her arm away.
What could I do? I let her go. I wondered what she had started to say about her father. Had
she discovered what her father was? What her father had become?
I walked up the steps of the school with my head lowered in thought. As I opened the school
door, I ran right into someone.
"Hey, hey, watch where you're going, young lady."
"Mr. Chapman!" I recoiled in fear.
42
See, you have to realize that this was the man who had once directed a Hork-Bajir soldier to
kill us all if he caught us. Kill us and only save our heads for identification.
That kind of thing sticks in your mind.
He peered at me. "What's the matter with you, Rachel? A little jumpy this morning?"
I nodded. "Yes, sir. I guess I didn't sleep too well."
"Bad dreams?" he asked.
My mouth was dry. "I guess so, Mr. Chapman.
He smiled. A normal, human smile. His eyes even crinkled up a little as he grinned down at
me. "Well, shake it off. Nightmares aren't real, you know."
"At least not most of the time," I said to myself.
43
Chapter Eleven
We couldn't go to the Chapmans' the next night because Marco and I both had papers we had
to write. And the night after that was Cassie's dad's birthday.
But finally, there we were again on the street outside the Chapmans' house. It was a little
before eight.
Fluffer was out of the house, smelling a fence post four blocks over, where another cat had
left his scent. At least, that's what Tobias reported.
"Are you ready?" Jake asked me.
I nodded.
"Are you sure?" Cassie asked. "You can put this off if you want. We don't have to do this
tonight."
"The sooner the better," I said. "We all know something is wrong in that house. Melissa
is still my friend. Maybe somehow I can help her."
"Your job is not to help Melissa Chapman," Marco pointed out. "You're supposed to be
spying on Chapman. You're supposed to be finding some way for us to get at the Yeerks, so
that we can all turn into wild animals and get ourselves killed."
"I know why I'm doing this, Marco," I said.
He nodded. "Okay. Well, take care of yourself in there. That's an assistant principal you're
dealing with. He finds out you've turned into a cat and gone sneaking around his house, that
will be after-school detention for like a year."
We all laughed. As if detention were the thing I had to fear. Marco can be obnoxious, but on
the other hand, he can make you laugh right when you really need to.
"I'm ready," I said. I waved my arms at the dark sky above. Tobias swooped down, opened
his wings to slow his speed, and settled on the fence beside us.
"How does it look up there, Tobias?" Jake asked.
Looks fine. The cat is nowhere near the house. There's no one out walking around, except
way over on Loughlin Street. There are a couple of cars, but not coming toward you.
"You know, you have quite a future in burglary," Marco said to Tobias. "You and I can
burglarize places, and Jake can be Spiderman and catch us."
"Okay, I'm ready to do this," I announced. "As ready as I'm going to get, anyway."
Tobias sent me a private message. Rachel, if you get into any trouble, just try and make it
out side. I can lift you out of any danger. 
I prepared to morph. I concentrated on Fluffer. It was easy to do. I had a very clear mental
image of Fluffer dropping down out of that tree, ready to kill me when I was a shrew.
44
Inside my own body, Fluffer's DNA was stored, ready to be used. All I had to do was
concentrate... concentrate....
Each morphing is different. Especially the first time, when you can't even think about
controlling how it happens. Even Cassie can't control the first morph.
In the case of Fluffer, it started with fur. Black fur came first, and then the white fur began to
grow. The fur had almost completely grown in while I was still mostly human. I had
luxurious fur on my arms. On my legs. On my face. Fur and whiskers, with everything else
pretty much the same.
"Oh, that is cool!" Cassie said. She was staring at me and grinning this huge grin. "That is
way cool. You look great."
Marco and Jake nodded agreement.
"It's kind of weird, but also kind of pretty," Marco said. "I'm thinking you could do
commercials for cat food. You sing a little song, maybe dance a little. Forget Morris the cat.
You would rule."
I began to shrink. But it was strange, because as I shrank and my outer clothing slithered off
me, I didn't feel like I was getting smaller. I felt more like I was getting stronger.
It was like I was shedding all this unnecessary stuff, these clumsy long legs, these ridiculous
weak arms.
I felt like I'd been boiled down to my absolute essentials. Like I wasn't even made out of
plain old flesh and bones anymore.
I felt like liquid steel.
I didn't feel the fear of the shrew. I didn't feel the total confidence of the elephant, either, or
of the eagle.
This was different. There was fear, sure. But underneath the fear was confidence. The cat
knew there were enemies out there, but he also knew he could handle it.
I felt... tough. That was it -- tough.
Then the cat's senses started sending messages to my brain.
Whoa! I yelled in surprise. Suddenly it isn't nighttime anymore! I mean, wow. Talk about
night vision!
"A cat's vision at night is about eight times stronger than a human's," Cassie said helpfully. "I
looked it up."
"Eight times?" Marco repeated. "Not seven, or nine? How do they measure that?"
But it wasn't just how well I saw that was strange. It was what I noticed.
45
A human being will notice colors, for exam ple. Now, a cat can see colors, more or less. He
just isn't interested in colors. It's like, okay, that thing is red. Who cares?
What cats really notice is movement. If anything moves, even the tiniest bit, the cat sees it. I
was standing there on the grass, looking around with my big cat eyes, and I saw nothing but
movement.
I saw every blade of grass that moved in the breeze. I saw every bug that crawled across
those blades of grass. I saw every bird in every tree as it fluffed its wings. And boy, did I see
the mice and the squirrels and the rats.
There was a mouse no more than twenty feet away. I could see the individual whiskers on his
little snout when they twitched.
Things that were not moving were boring to me. If the mouse just stayed completely still, I
would forget he was even there.
"How are you doing?" Jake asked me. I had no trouble at all hearing his voice. But
it was irrelevant. It had no meaning. The mouse was making a tiny little scritching sound as it
worked its little teeth around a nut, trying to chew it open.
I cared about that sound. I cared about that sound a lot.
"Rachel, can you hear us? It's me, Cassie."
Yes, I can hear you. I just can't seem to concentrate very well on you. There are so many
other things to hear and see and smell. 
"Well, at least she's not running around out of control," Marco said.
Suddenly I sensed something over my head, a shape, a shadow, a figure. Lightning quick, I
turned my head. My ears flattened back against my skull. The hair on my back stood up and
my tail puffed out to three times its normal size. My claws extended. I drew back my mouth
and showed my teeth.
It all happened in a split second. I was ready for battle.
And whatever this was attacking me, I wanted it to know it would be sorry it messed with
Fluffer McKitty.
"Hhhhhiisssss!"
I was ready to fight. I was pumped. Kill or be killed.
It is so cool when you feel the razor-sharp claws sliding out of your delicate-looking pink
pads.
"Rachel, take a pill, girl, it's just Tobias," Cassie said soothingly. "Tobias? I think maybe
you'd better stay away," she called up to the sky. "Cats are genetically programmed to be
afraid of large birds."
46
She was right. The shadow of Tobias scared me pretty good. It was strange, because it was a
fear I shared with the shrew.
But it was a different type of fear than the shrew's. This was more like I was angry, too. Only
that wasn't quite it, either. I guess it wasn't a real emotion at all. Basically, when I'd hissed I
was just trying to communicate. And the message I was trying to communicate was, "Don't
mess with me. You may be bigger than me, you may scare me, you may make me run away,
but if I have to I am ready to fight."
That was my whole cat message to the world: Don't mess with me. Don't get in my way, don't
try to touch me if I don't want to be touched, don't try to keep me from getting what I want.
I was self-contained. I was complete. I didn't need anything but myself. It seemed lonely to
my human self, but at the same time, it was all very calm somehow.
I'm okay, I said. I think I'm pretty much in control. 
"What's it like?" Cassie asked.
lt's like... You know those old cowboy movies with Clint Eastwood? He's a gunslinger
and he walks into the saloon and everyone kind of gets out of his way? And how he's not
really looking for trouble, but you'd better not make him mad? That's what it's like. It's like
I'm Clint Eastwood.
"Can you do this, do you think?" Jake asked me.
Oh, yeah. I can do anything. 
"Don't let the cat's arrogance get you in trouble," Marco advised. "Keep a little of your good
old human fear." He paused. "Oh, I forgot, mighty Rachel doesn't have any good old human
fear. So here's what you do: Borrow some of my good old human fear. I have plenty to spare.
"
"He's right, Rachel," Cassie agreed. "Keep focused. Between your own natural attitude and
the cat's 'tude, you could get cocky."
I cast a glance back toward the mouse. He had broken into the nut at last. I could kill him. I
was sure of that. He was a plump little mouse, and I would catch him easily. But I wasn't
hungry. So he'd get to live a while longer.
No problem, I said.
"We're here if you get into a mess," Cassie reassured me.
l'll meow if I need help. Don't worry. I'm in control now. It'll be fine.
But the truth is, I was lying, just a little. See, I wasn't completely in control of the cat. For
some reason I didn't want to completely control the cat. I kind of liked his arrogance. It made
me feel more sure of myself. And despite what the others thought about me, I needed all the
confidence I could get.
47
"The morph clock is ticking," Cassie said."It's quarter to eight. Remember that."
48
Chapter Twelve
I headed at an easy trot down the sidewalk toward the Chapman home. As soon as I started
moving I thought, Oh, man, if I could just keep some of this for my next gymnastics class.
It was like grace beyond any grace you can imagine as a human. I passed a wooden fence.
There was a railing up high, maybe three feet up. I looked up at it and then, before I could
even think about it, I leaped. My powerful hind legs coiled up and released.
I sailed through the air. Three feet straight up, and I was an animal that stood only about
twelve or thirteen inches tall. It was the same as a human being just leaping to the top of a
two- story building.
And it was totally nothing.
It was just automatic. I wanted to jump, so I did. I wanted to stick the landing on a narrow
two-inch-wide rail, and of course, no problem.
Compared to a cat, the best gymnast who ever lived is like a big staggering cow or
something.
"Um, Rachel, what exactly are you doing?" Jake asked.
They were all standing there looking at me. I had totally forgotten they were still around.
Just practicing, I said. I jumped back down to the grass. Okay, get the job done first, I
ordered myself sternly. You can worry about the Kitty Olympics later.
I started again toward the house, but this time something forced me to stop. It was a
telephone pole. The smell that emanated from it was overpowering. I went over to it. I sniffed
it again and again in short snorts of air. The air was trapped in a series of chambers above my
palette. It would be held there even while I went on breathing. That way I could get every
possible bit of information from that smell.
It was definitely a tom's scent. A tomcat had marked this pole by peeing on it. He was a
dominant cat. Very dominant. His smell made me nervous. Not afraid, just a little less
arrogant than I had been. If this cat appeared, I would have to submit. I would have to make
myself smaller and less threatening and accept his dominance.
Or I could fight him and get my butt kicked.
It was just the way things were. It was all there in the smell of his urine, where any cat could
read it.
I resumed trotting toward the Chapman home.
Rachel, are you sure you're in control? Tobias's voice was in my head. Why did you stop
to sniff that pole?
I figured I should look like a real cat, I said. I was just playing the part. 
49
lf you say so, he said doubtfully. Just remember: It's fun being an animal for a while. Not
so fun when it's permanent. The two-hour clock is ticking. Tick tock. 
That got my attention. It was like a dash of cold water in my face. I focused my human mind
and took greater control over the cat's mind. But it wasn't easy. The cat's mind did not even
understand the notion of obeying.
 So I used something the cat would respond to. I conjured up the memory of the big tom's
smell. That triggered the cat's submissiveness. I felt my part of the collective mind grow
larger.
You're almost there, Tobias said. This is the right yard.
Yes, I know. My scent is everywhere,-This whole area smells of me. This is home. This is
all mine.
Rachel, this is all Chapman's. And Chapman belongs to Visser Three. Don't forget that.
I trotted to the cat door. Chapman. Visser Three. Big deal. I was a combination of Rachel and
Fluffer. What did I care about Chapman and Visser Three?
The light inside the house was bright. My eyes adjusted instantly. My nose picked up the
smell of cat food, too dry and old to interest me. I also smelled the humans: Melissa, Mr.
Chapman, and Ms. Chapman. Don't ask me how I knew that what I smelled were those three
people. I just knew.
I spotted a cockroach in the dust balls in the dark beneath the refrigerator. No interest to me.
Roaches made interesting scritchy noises sometimes, and they were fun to watch run. But
they smelled wrong. They were not prey.
Swift movements!
Feet. Human feet. I didn't bother looking up. It was Ms. Chapman.
High-pitched sounds coming from the motor of the refrigerator. They were annoying. There
were also the sounds of birds outside. They had a nest up under the eaves.
Then the sound of Melissa's voice.
Where was she? I didn't see her anywhere. The sound was muffled.
I tried to focus. My ears moved to point to ward the sound. It came from above me. Above
and far away.
She was in her bedroom, that's where. I couldn't hear the words clearly, but I knew that she
was muttering to herself.
I trotted across the kitchen floor. I knew - as Rachel- I knew I should be afraid. But I couldn't
be afraid. Everything here smelled like me. My scent glands had left their marks all over --
on that door, on that cupboard, on that chair. It re assured me.
50
The big dominant tomcat's smell was not in here. No, there were no other cats in here at all.
Only human smells, and those were not very important.
I left the kitchen and paused at the corner between the hallway and the family room.
Chapman was there, in the living room. I could smell him. He was just sitting on the couch. I
glanced at him and walked on.
But then I stopped. My human brain sensed something wrong with the picture. Chapman was
just sitting on the couch. No TV. No music. He wasn't reading a book or a newspaper. Just
sitting.
I turned back to the kitchen. I looked up at Ms. Chapman. She was doing something at the
sink. Maybe washing dishes. No, she was cutting vegetables. But again, no TV. No music.
She wasn't humming to herself. She wasn't talking to herself the way my mom does when
she's working in the kitchen.
Not right. Something was not right with either of the Chapmans. I went back to the hallway.
There were stairs leading up to the bedrooms. From the hallway I could hear Melissa more
clearly. I concentrated, trying to ignore the fascinating sounds of the birds under the eaves. I
focused on the human sounds of Melissa's voice.
"Di.. divided by the square root... no, wait. No, square root times... Is that right?"
She was doing her homework. Her math home work, obviously.
Like I should be doing, I thought. I had a pang of guilt. Instead of doing my homework, I was
creeping around my friend's house spying on her and her parents.
I tried to find a clock. I had to watch the time. At nine forty-five my two hours would be up. I
wanted to be out of morph and back in my normal body long before then. Hopefully, I could
still get home and do my math homework and at least do some of the reading for social
studies class.
I spotted a clock. It was over the mantel, between pictures of the Chapmans and Melissa.
The clock said three minutes until eight. I had plenty of time.

Sudden movement!
Oh, just Chapman standing up.

The cat part of me wasn't interested in Chapman one way or the other. But I forced myself to
pay attention. It was important to watch him. That was why I was here.
Is he prey? The cat brain seemed to be asking.
Yes. Yes, I told the cat brain. Chapman is our prey.
I followed Chapman as he headed down the hallway. Either he didn't notice me, or else he
didn't care. He opened a door that let loose a flood of smells. Dampness. Mildew. Bugs.
Rachel? How are you doing in there?
51
I jerked in surprise. A very un-catlike movement.
It was Tobias. He had to be fairly close for me to be able to hear his thought-speech. He must
be on the roof or perched on a nearby tree branch. I strained my sensitive cat hearing. The
birds under the eaves were silent. They were afraid of the big hawk.
I'm fine, I said. But you scared me half to death!
Sorry. I was just worried.
Well, don't worry. I'm following Chapman down to the basement. 
Why?
Because that's where he's going. Duh, I said. Somehow, Tobias's human words were
annoying me. He wanted me to pay attention to him and it was hard to do. The cat didn't care
about his words. The cat just wanted to go down and look around the basement. Fortunately,
that's what I wanted to do, too.
I trotted down the rough wooden stairs after Chapman. Very weird, by the way. Going
downstairs as a cat gave me a feeling of vertigo. I mean, I was going down head first. It's
strange.
Look, Tobias, I appreciate you looking out for me. But I'm kind of busy right now.
I understand. I can't hear you very well, anyway. You're getting farther away. 
Yeah, I'm going down. I waited. He said nothing. Tobias? I called. But there was no
answer. We're still learning about thought-speech. We know there are limits on how far it can
be "heard." But we aren't sure what the limits are.
The basement had paneling all around. The ceiling was bare wood and full of spiders and
other interesting things. No mice, though. Nothing that could be considered actual prey. But
many things that might be fun to chase.
Chapman is the prey, I reminded myself. We are hunting Chapman.
There was a sort of TV room with a pool table and some old chairs and a couch. But it was
obvious that no one had used them for a long time. There were no human scents on them.
There was dust everywhere and I could hear that there were spiders inside the TV set.
The only part of the basement that appeared to have been used was a path right across the
floor. I smelled the scents that Chapman had tracked there with his shoes.
He walked in a straight line across the basement to a door. It was a simple white-painted
door. Chapman pulled a set of keys out of his pocket. He unlocked the white door.
He opened it and stepped through. Five feet beyond the white door was a second door. This
one was made of gleaming steel. It looked like the door to a bank vault.
52
Beside the steel door, there was a small, square white panel of light. Chapman pressed his
hand against it.
The steel door opened. It slid into the wall like the doors on Star Trek.
I knew I had to go after him. But my human mind was afraid. And my cat mind didn't see any
reason why I should walk into that dark place.
To both of us, it felt like a trap. Like a place we couldn't get out of.
But I had to. I had to go in there. That was the whole point of this spying trip.
And Chapman was my prey.
At the last second, just as the door swooshed shut, I bounded into the room.
It was dark at first, not that it bothered me. Then Chapman turned on a low light. It was
strange, because I could actually see better in the dark than I could with the low light.
There was a sort of desk set into the wall. It was gray steel and very unusual-looking. There
were more little light panels in various cheerful colors. And there was something that looked
like a small but complicated spotlight hanging down from the ceiling. In front of the desk was
a chair. A totally normal office-type chair. Chapman sat in it.
He ran his hands over a blue panel. Then he looked at his watch. He sat patiently,
waiting.
For about a minute, nothing happened. I tried to look nonchalant, like I had just happened to
wander in. But at the same time I was careful to stay behind Chapman so he wouldn't see me.
I remembered Jake's warning. About how any one else would just assume I was a plain old
cat. But Chapman knew about morphing. The Yeerks knew about the Andalite morphing
technology. So if Chapman or any Controller ever saw an animal acting the wrong way, they
could suspect the truth.
Suddenly a brilliant light snapped on. My cat eyes adjusted instantly, but even so, the light
was painfully bright. It came from the little spotlight thing. Chapman turned around in his
chair to face the light.
The light began to change. It took shape. It turned different colors.
The four hooves appeared. The bluish fur. The many-fingered hands. The flat, intelligent face
with no mouth and only slits for a nose. The penetrating, almond-shaped main eyes. Then the
strange extra eyes, mounted on stalks that turned this way and that, looking around the room.
Last came the tail, the wicked, curved, scorpionlike tail.
An Andalite. Just like the Andalite prince who had given us our powers.
But I knew this was no true Andalite. Dread washed over me. Dread too strong for even my
cat brain to ignore.
53
This was no true Andalite. This was the only Andalite body ever seized and taken over by the
Yeerks. The only Andalite-Controller in all the galaxy.
This was Visser Three. Leader of the Yeerk invasion force. The evil creature who could
morph into monsters acquired from all over the universe.
This was Visser Three, the creature who had murdered the Andalite prince while we cowered
in terror.
This was Visser Three, who had nearly killed us all in the hell of the Yeerk pool.
"Welcome, Visser," Chapman said in a very humble voice. was Iniss two two six of the Sulp
Niaar pool submits to you. May the Kandrona shine and strengthen you."
"And you, Iniss two two six," Visser Three said. I was shocked to hear the Visser's voice. In
his Andalite body he had no mouth. Andalites communicate telepathically, just the way I do
when I'm in a morph.
The second shock came from what they had said to each other. "Iniss two two six." That had
to be the name of the Yeerk slug who controlled Chapman.
The cat part of my brain was busy with a different question. Was this apparition real? No.
There was no scent. No scent at all. Only light and shadows.
It was a hologram, I knew. But it was a very convincing hologram. Visser Three seemed
almost solid. He looked around as though he could see from his holographic eyes.
I prayed he wouldn't look at me.
"Report, Iniss."
"Yes, Visser."
Part of me just wanted to run. Even a hologram of Visser Three makes your skin crawl. But
now that he had figured out it wasn't real, the cat part of me was just bored.
I realized why I could hear Visser Three -- the hologram projector must not be able to
transmit thought-speech. It translated it into regular speech.
"Is there progress on locating the Andalite bandits?"
"No, Visser. Nothing yet."
I knew who he meant by "Andalite bandits."
That was us, the Animorphs.
"I want them found. I want them found NOW!"
Chapman jumped back in surprise at the Visser's command. I could smell fear on him.
54
In a calmer tone, Visser Three went on. "This cannot go on, Iniss two two six, it cannot go
on. The Council of Thirteen will hear of it. They will wonder why I reported to them that all
Andalite ships near this planet had been destroyed and all the Andalites killed. They will be
suspicious. They will be angry. And when the Council of Thir teen is angry with me, I am
angry with you."
Chapman was literally quivering. I smelled human sweat. And I smelled something else.
Something not totally human. It was very faint... was that the Yeerk itself I was smelling?
Was I smelling the Yeerk slug in Chapman's head?
It seemed impossible. But there was some strange smell. Something... something... I
concentrated all my cat mind on analyzing the smell.
"What is that?"
Chapman swiveled in his chair.
I looked up and froze. Chapman was staring right at me. And worse, much worse, Visser
Three's stalk eyes were focused on me, too.
"It's called a cat," Chapman said nervously. "An Earth species used as a pet. The humans
keep them close and find comfort in them."
"Why is it in here?" "It belongs to the girl. My... the host's daughter."
"I see," Visser Three said. "Well, kill it. Kill it immediately."
55
Chapter Thirteen
Kill it. Kill it immediately.
I wanted to run. I wanted to panic.
But some strange combination of the cat's cunning and my own intelligence came together
and saved me.
I didn't so much as flick a whisker. If I had, I would have been dead. I knew that for a fact. If
I'd reacted like I'd understood, they would have known for sure that I was no normal cat.
Visser Three's hologram watched me closely. All four of his Andalite eyes were focused on
me now. And behind that gentle Andalite expression, I could feel the razor-sharp focus of the
powerful, evil Yeerk. Chapman, too, was staring at me. He had the same look in his eyes that
he had when he caught someone trying to skip out of school.
I was terrified. Or at least the Rachel part of me was terrified. Fluffer couldn't have cared
less. He sensed my concern, but he had none of his own. There were no birds of prey here.
There were no dogs. There were no smells of dominant cats. There was only a sort of threedimensional
picture that had no scent. And Chapman. Chapman might be prey, or he might
not, but he was certainly no threat.
"It could be an Andalite," Visser Three said. "Destroy it."
In response I said, "Meow."
Visser Three glared at me. "What is that?"
"It's... it's... the s-s-sound a cat makes, Visser. I b-b-believe it wishes to eat."
SAWWWAPP!
Suddenly, without warning, Visser Three whipped his tail at me. A dangerous, foot-long,
scythe-shaped blade arced toward me at a speed no human could hope to evade.
But I wasn't just a human. In a tenth of the time it took to blink, I had seen the sudden
motion and I was crouched down, ears back, teeth bared. My paw, claws out stretched,
swiped at the tail blade.
My paw went straight through the hologram. And the blade, nothing but a projection, swept
through me.
"Ha, ha, ha."
It took me a second to make sense of the sound.
It was Visser Three laughing.
Chapman seemed amazed, too. Like he had never heard the Visser laugh. Like it wasn't even
possible to imagine the Visser laughing.
56
"What a ferocious little beast," Visser Three said approvingly. "See how he did not back
away or run? I am many times his size and yet he struck at me. A pity that the species is too
small to serve as a host."
"Yes, a pity," Chapman said warily.
"Kill it," Visser Three said. "What better form for an Andalite to use? Better kill
it, just to be safe."
"Yes, Visser," Chapman said. "O-o-only..."
"Only what?" the Visser snapped.
"It belongs to the girl. If I kill the animal she will be angry. She may draw attention. Killing a
cat is seen as a bad deed. It would violate my cover."
Visser Three did not look happy to be disobeyed. But he was not a creature who made
impetuous decisions. He considered for a moment while my future just hung there, balancing
be tween life and death.
"Do not violate your cover or draw attention," the Visser said at last.
I figured it was time for me to do something in my own defense. I walked over and rubbed
my flank against Chapman's leg.
"What is it doing?" Visser Three demanded.
"It is signaling that it wishes to be fed."
"Interesting. Claws and teeth and ferocity mixed with the subtlety to manipulate creatures
larger than itself. A worthy creature. Yes, let it live, for now. Let it live until we have
resolved the matter of the girl."
Chapman's face actually seemed to twitch. It was the only emotion he had shown, other than
fear.
"The girl? But... Visser... the agreement with the human Chapman..."
Visser Three sneered. "Agreements. Don't be a fool. We make agreements to gain voluntary
hosts. Agreements are a tool. Just as you are my tool. If you had brought me the Andalite
bandits, I would not have to concern myself with a cat or a girl."
Chapman bowed his head. "I will bring them to you."
"Do that," Visser Three said coldly. And then the solid-seeming image began to change. The
gentle Andalite body melted away and in its place grew a monster like nothing ever seen on
Earth.
Where the Andalite head had been, there was now a long, thick tube. There was an opening
like some horrible mouth at the end of the tube. The thing was purple, but translucent. You
57
could al most see through it, although I wasn't sure if that was because it was a hologram, or
if the animal itself was that way.
The hologram Visser lowered the tube-mouth toward Chapman's head. The mouth opened,
revealing hundreds, maybe thousands, of tiny suck ers, each dripping slime.
It seemed as if the tube mouth closed over Chapman's head.
Chapman shook and quivered in terror.
Visser Three's artificial voice said, "Don't forget, Iniss two two six, I gave you this Chapman
body. I placed you in his head because I trusted you. I fed you his brain and made you my
lieutenant. But I can suck you back out again if you fail me. Would you like to see what
happened to the last fool who failed me?"
Suddenly an image appeared in the air, like a little movie. It was a second hologram. It
showed a human woman, pain-wracked, screaming, with the purple creature sucking on her
head.
The real Chapman began to moan. "Oh, oh, no, Visser. I beg you."
In the little movie the translucent purple thing suddenly went into a spasm. From the woman's
ear there came the slug. It was sucked, dripping, gray, slimy, right out of her head.
The purple creature swallowed the Yeerk slug.
Then the little movie ended.
"Not a very pretty picture, is it, Iniss two two six?"
Chapman just shook his head. His eyes were still staring at the empty air where the image
had appeared.
Visser Three began to resume the Andalite form.
"Don't fail me," Visser Three said.
Suddenly Visser Three vanished. The room was dark again. Chapman sat hunched over the
desk, with his head in his hands. It was a while before he opened the door and we both went
back up the stairs.
Ms. Chapman was there, waiting. "What are the Visser's orders?" she asked in a whisper.
Chapman looked at her like he'd just seen a ghost. "He wants the Andalite bandits. He... he
morphed into a Vanarx. A Yeerkbane."
He kept his voice low, too. He glanced toward the stairs. I guess he was checking to see if
Melissa was around.
Ms. Chapman shuddered. "I'd heard that he acquired a Vanarx. I always thought it was just
another story to frighten his underlings."
58
"He showed me... he showed how he de stroyed Iniss one seven four."
Ms. Chapman looked shocked. "He used a Vanarx on an Iniss of the second century?"
"That Andalite-Controlling scum," Chapman said viciously. "I wish the Council of Thirteen
would find out what kind of a mess he's making on this planet. Let them take that Andalite
body from him and throw him back in some distant pool on the home world."
"Don't wish for that," Ms. Chapman said grimly. "Long before Visser Three loses power, he
will surely have destroyed you for failing him."
My cat ears noticed the sound before either of the Chapmans. Movement. Human feet
pounding. I cocked my ears toward the stairs.
"Hey, Mom? Dad? Can one of you help me with this math problem?"
It was Melissa. She was halfway down the stairs. She stopped and glanced hopefully at her
parents. Or at least at the people who had once been her parents.
"We're busy right now, Melissa," Chapman snapped.
"Besides, dear, you should do your own work. That's how you learn," Ms. Chapman said. "If
you still can't figure it out later, your father will help you." Melissa's face fell. She forced a
smile, but there was no happiness there at all. "I guess you're right, Mom. It's just this square
root
stuff." She hesitated, like she was hoping her parents might change their minds and go back
upstairs with her.
Ms. Chapman smiled. It was a smile as empty as Melissa's. "Square roots are hard to
understand, aren't they? But I know you can do it."
"I'll come up and check on you before you turn in, sweetheart," Mr. Chapman said.
The words were normal enough. I guess my own mom or dad could have said exactly the
same things to me. "Dear." "Sweetheart." But the way they were said... There was
something missing. Humanity. Love. Call it whatever you want. The words were right, but
they were cornpletely wrong.
It was horrible. Horrible in a totally different way than the monsters we had fought in the
Yeerk pool. This was the kind of horrible that made you want to cry instead of scream. And
suddenly I found myself running after Melissa as she headed back up the stairs. When I
reached her room, Melissa sat down on the bed and began sobbing.
Rachel? Can you hear me?
Yes, Tobias. I'm up out of the basement. I'm upstairs in Melissa's room.
Thank goodness. I've been trying you every minute or so. I was worried that you were
trapped downstairs. 
59
No, I'm out. 
Good. You have more than an hour left, but Fluffer is trying to head home. Cassie and Jake
and Marco are trying to capture him again, but you know better than anyone how wily he can
be. 
Melissa flopped on her face on the bed. She pulled a pillow over the back of her head and
just cried.
 I can't leave just yet, I said.
Rachel, if the real Fluffer walks in while you're still there...
Yeah, I know. But I still can't leave right now. I have something I have to do. 
I went over to the bed. As small as I was, the side of the bed looked like a wall. It could have
been the side of a two-story building. I settled back on my haunches, gathering energy in my
leg muscles. Then I sprang up, effortlessly, to land with perfect grace on the bed.
I walked over to Melissa and sniffed her hair sticking out from under the pillow. I heard a
sound coming from somewhere. It was a sound that reminded me of my mother. It reminded
me of
both my mothers, the human woman, and the cat who had licked my fur and carried me
around in her mouth.
I recognized the sound. It was purring. I was purring.
Melissa put her arm around me and drew me close. The physical contact made me a little
anxious. It made the cat in me want to leave. But then she started scratching my neck and
behind my ears. I purred a little louder and decided to stay for a while.
"I don't know what I've done," Melissa said.
It startled me to realize she was talking to me. Did she guess the truth? Did she know I was
human?
No. She was just a girl talking to her cat. "I don't know what I did," Melissa repeated. "Tell
me, Fluffer McKitty. What did I do?"
Rachel, what are you doing in there?
Tobias, I have plenty of time.
You have less than an hour. Don't push your luck. Jake is practically having a fit out here.
He's telling me to tell you to get out.
Not yet. Melissa needs me.
I had stopped purring. Probably because I was preoccupied, arguing with Tobias. I started
purring again. I felt Melissa needed me to purr.
60
She was still crying. Still scratching slowly behind my ears.
"What did I do, Flutter?" she asked again. "Why don't they love me anymore?"
I felt like my own heart would break right then.
Because I knew now why Melissa had stopped hanging out with me. I knew why she had
become more withdrawn. And I knew how little hope there was for her.
My stomach turned and twisted.
Next time Marco asked why we were fighting the Yeerks, I knew I would have a whole new
answer. Because they destroy the love of parents for their daughter. Because they made
Melissa Chapman cry in her bed with no one to comfort her but a cat.
It was a small answer, I guess. I mean, it wasn't some high-sounding answer about the en tire
human race. It was just about this one girl. My friend. Whose heart was broken because her
parents were no longer really her parents.
Look, Rachel, I told Jake what you said. He said to remind you that you have a job to do
in there. You're not in there to com-
Tell Jake to shut up, Tobias, I said angrily. l'll come out. I'll come out. Just not yet.
I purred as loud as I could.
Melissa cried. And it came to me, like a vision: All the children all over, whose parents had
been made into Controllers. And the parents whose children had been taken from them to be
turned into Controllers. It was a terrible image. I wondered how it must feel to see your
parents stop loving you.
After a while, Melissa fell asleep. I got up and padded down the stairs to the pet door.
It was chilly outside. My friends were all wait ing. They were also a little mad at me for
making them wait and worry.
"You only have ten minutes to spare, Rachel," Jake said. "I hope it was worth scaring us all
half to death. Did you at least discover something useful?"
Yes. I discovered plenty. I discovered that Chapman has a way to communicate directly
with Visser Three. I discovered that Visser Three is pretty hot to catch us, although he still
thinks we're Andalites. And I decided something, too. 
"What?" Cassie asked me.
I decided that I don't care what it takes, or how many risks I have to run. I don't care what
happens to me. I hate these Yeerks. I hate them. I hate them. And I will find a way to stop
them.
61
Chapter Fourteen
That night and the next morning, I barely got any homework done. In math class that day I
got the first C I'd gotten in a long time. My grades were starting to fall because I was busy
trying
to save the world. Or at least to save my old friend.
I knew now what had happened. Why Melissa and I weren't friends anymore, at least not
close
friends. Something had gone terribly wrong in her life. Her parents no longer loved her. They
pretended to, they sounded like they did, but Melissa knew it was all wrong.
Every time I thought of it, I felt like my insides were burning up from the anger. I guess I
knew a little bit about what she was feeling.
When my parents got divorced, I worried that maybe that meant they didn't love me anymore.
I was wrong. They still did. I don't see my dad as much as I would like to, but he does love
me. My mom loves me. Even my sisters love me. Love is pretty important. It's like wearing a
suit of armor. It makes you strong.
On my way out of math class, Jake came sidling up next to me. "Meeting later, okay?"
"Yeah. Whatever. Where at?"
"The church tower, where we were the other day."
"Okay. But it's a long walk."
He turned around to face me, walking backward and grinning. "So, don't walk," he said. He
waved and headed off down the hall.
Two hours later I was in the air. Let me tell you something: Getting that big eagle body off
the ground isn't easy. It is definitely work. I wondered if my human body got any of the
aerobic benefits of the exercise.
Once I got clear of the ground, I was able to catch little gusts of wind to climb higher. But it
wasn't till I made it above the trees and the school buildings that I started getting a good,
solid breeze that helped lift me up.
When I finally got high enough, I spotted Tobias. His reddish tail feathers were like a
beacon.
Man, that was a workoutea I said when I got close enough.
Tell me about it. Follow me. The mall is an excellent place for thermals.
The mall? Why the mall?
lt's all that parking space. See, the concrete gets hot in the sun. The concrete, the cars, the
buildings themselves, they're all hot. So there's almost always a nice warm updraft.
62
Flying is like the nicest thing in the world, I said dreamily.
Yes, it is, Tobias agreed. One of the nicest things. But there are things you miss, too.
Sitting back on the couch with a can of pop and a bag of chips and no school the next day and
something good on TV. That's a good feeling, too. 
He didn't sound like he was feeling sorry for himself. Just like he was mentioning something
that happened to be true.
There's the church tower. I see another bird heading toward it. And I think I see Cassie
coming out of her morph. 
Down we go, Tobias said.
Ten minutes later I had morphed back into my human body.
"You know what we need?" Marco said. "We need to coordinate these morphing outfits. I
mean, Cassie's wearing green patterned leggings and a purple stretch top, and Jake's got on
those
awful bike shorts, and Rachel is stylish, as always, in her black tights. Put it all together and
we look pretty scruffy."
"What do you want?" Jake asked him. "You want us all to wear blue with a big number four
on our chests? Become the Fantastic Four?"
The Fantastic Four plus the amazing Bird Boy, Tobias added.
"No way," Marco said. "Not Fantastic Four. I'm thinking more an X-Men kind of thing. It's
not about being identical, it's just about having some style. Right now, if anyone saw us, they
wouldn't think 'Oh, cool, superheroes," they'd think "Man, those people do not know how to
dress.""
"Marco," I said, "I think it's time to get over this fantasy of yours. We are not superheroes.
This is not a comic book."
"Yes, but I really, really want it to be a comic book. See, in a comic book the heroes
don't get killed. I mean, okay, they killed Superman that time, but it was only temporary."
"Can we deal with reality here?" Jake asked. "We have business to discuss."
"What's the matter with combining green and purple?" Cassie asked Marco.
"It's a major fashion no-no," Marco said.
"Been reading Vogue again, Marco?" I teased.
Jake put his hand over Marco's mouth. "People? And I use the term loosely. We need to
decide what we're doing next."
Marco pried Jake's hand away. "I want to decide what we're not doing next. I should be
spending more time with my dad. You know, he's still messed up over my mom...."
63
Marco's voice always cracked whenever he mentioned his mom. He'd start out sounding
tough and all, but his voice would end up with that little break, that little wobble. It had been
two years since his mother disappeared. They said she drowned, although they never found
her body. His father had fallen apart. It was the main reason Marco was so reluctant to be an
Animorph. He was worried that if anything ever happened to him, his dad would just give up
totally.
I could see that Jake was about to say some thing impatient. And I was feeling the same way,
like Marco just needed to deal with reality.
But Cassie put her hand on Marco's arm. "Don't ever let any of this get in the way of
spending time with your dad," she said earnestly. "He needs you. We need you, too, Marco,
but your dad comes first." She looked at Jake, then at me.
"There isn't much point in doing any of this if we forget why we're doing it."
I thought about Melissa. And I thought about my mom and dad and how great it was to have
them, even when they got on my nerves.
"Cassie's right. When you get home, tell your dad you love him, Marco." I blurted it out with
out thinking about it. It wasn't the kind of thing I normally say.
"Thank you, Doctor Rachel,"Marco said.
He said it snidely, but I could see he knew what I was talking about. Then he was suddenly
all business. He rubbed his hands together. "Okay, let's get serious here. How are we going to
go about getting ourselves killed next? Turn into flies at a frog convention? Morph into
turkeys at Thanksgiving?"
"I want to go back in," I said. "Back into Chapman's."
"Why?" Jake asked. "We learned a lot already. We -"
"We didn't learn the location of the Kandrona," I pointed out. "That's what we need to do,
sooner or later. The Andalite made it pretty clear to Tobias that the Kandrona is the weak
point for the Yeerks. The Kandrona sends out the rays that are concentrated in the Yeerk
pools. If we destroy
the Kandrona, we hurt them bad."
Marco raised a skeptical eyebrow. "Excuse me, Rachel, but what is a Kandrona? I mean, we
know what it does, but what does it look like? How big is it? For all we know, the Kandrona
could be the size of a lighter and be in Visser Three's pocket."
That's not the impression I got from the Andalite, Tobias said.
"Whatever," Marco said impatiently. "The point is: How do we destroy something when we
don't even know what it is?"
64
"That's why we have to follow the one lead we have," I said. "Chapman. Chapman
communicates with Visser Three. The two of them know where the Kandrona is. If I can spy
on them, maybe I can figure it out."
They were all staring at me. Marco looked at me like I was crazy. Jake looked thoughtful.
Cassie looked worried, like she wasn't sure about what I was saying.
Tobias turned his fierce, intimidating hawk's stare on me. Are you sure you're just going
back to spy on Chapman? he asked me privately.
"I don't think you should go back in there alone," Jake said.
"How is anyone else going to go in with me?" I asked. "We can't have two cats running
around. I mean, as Fluffer I can go anywhere without any of them being suspicious."
See... I hadn't told anyone about Visser Three telling Chapman to kill me. I knew it was
wrong to keep secrets like that from the group.
But if I'd told them, they would have never let me go back in.
Unfortunately, although Jake may not be all that perceptive, Cassie is.
"Are you sure nothing went wrong while you were in there, Rachel?" Cassie asked me. She
was looking at me with this kind of sideways look Cassie gets when she's trying to figure
someone out.
"It was scary," I said. "But nothing happened." It wasn't exactly a lie. Kind of a lie, but not
exactly.
Cassie thought for a moment. Her eyes went blank. Suddenly I knew what was going on:
Tobias was talking to her privately. He was telling her something. She nodded like she was
agreeing.
Tobias didn't know what happened with Visser Three. But he did know that I was pretty
freaky when I came up out of that basement.
"I think we should find a way for someone to go along with Rachel," Cassie suggested.
"What are you going to do, turn into a flea and ride on my back?" I asked her.
She smiled and gave a little shrug. "I'm just saying we should think about it."
"Okay then," Jake said. "Rachel goes in one more time. Maybe we'll get lucky."
"We haven't gotten lucky since we walked through that construction site and met our first
alien," Marco said.
"Maybe that's going to change," I said. "I'm going in and I'm finding a way to hurt those
creeps."
65
That's not the only reason you're going back in there, Tobias said in my head. You're not
just doing it to hurt the Yeerks, you're going back in there because you want to help
Melissa.
"Same thing," I said. I guess the others wondered who I was talking to.
66
Chapter Fifteen
It was a dark and stormy night.
Sorry, I've always wanted to write that. But it really was a dark and stormy night.
"Where is Jake?" I asked as we all got together down the street from Chapman's house.
Everyone else was there. Cassie and Marco were wearing raincoats, although it hadn't started
raining yet. Tobias was overhead, trying to hold onto a branch in a tree while the wind tried
to knock him off.
"Jake had to stay home," Marco said. "Some thing about his dad grounding him."
"Why would his dad ground him?"
"How do I know?" Marco said, sounding grouchy. "You know how parents are. Don't ask me
to explain them."
 I bit my lip. Somehow I felt more nervous with Jake being absent. The crazy wind whistling
through the branches wasn't helping my confidence, either.
I've spotted Fluffer, Tobias said so all could hear. He's kind of torturing a little rat he's
found. But at least it's not a shrew. 
"Look, I'm not a big fan of shrews just be cause I sort of was one." I took a deep breath.
"Okay, look, we can't always count on all of us being together, I guess. So we go without
Jake."
I glanced at Cassie. She smiled blandly.
Something was going on with her, but I didn't have time to find out what.
l'll scope out the area, Tobias volunteered. He opened his wings a little and was
immediately propelled out of the tree by the wind. I watched as he rode it expertly, swooping
quickly up into the air beyond the range of my weak human eyes.
After a while we saw something shooting over our heads at about fifty miles an hour. All
clear, Tobias called down as he shot past.
I felt strange. A little nauseous. A little scared. Everything seemed strange tonight. The weird
thing was, I knew I'd feel better as soon as I morphed.
I concentrated. The first raindrop fell just as I felt my tail grow out behind me. By the time I
had
fallen to the ground, surrounded by the tent of my clothing, the rain had started for real.
 "Oh, perfect," Marco said. "This just gets more and more fun."
At least you have a raincoat, I said. I have nothing but fur. And this rain makes it
impossible to smell anything out here.
67
Cassie squatted next to me. She's just a normal-sized girl, but when you're a ten-pound cat
any human being looks like Godzilla.
"Be careful, Rachel," Cassie said. And then she stroked my back. I started to move away, but
she kept her hand on my back for a few seconds. Then, smiling mysteriously, she stood up.

I found I soon lost interest in Cassie's expression. Cats really don't have much interest in
humans at all, unless food is involved.
I'm out of here, I said. I took off at a medium run. Cats don't like rain. I could feel the cat
brain's distaste. I'd always thought cats hated all water. But that wasn't Flufer's attitude. See,
to him it was all about the smells and the sounds. Rain washes away scents. Without scents, a
cat feels cut off and lost.
Almost as bad as losing smells is the fact that rain plopping all around you makes it hard to
listen for the important sounds: the tiny high-pitched squeaks and the little furtive scritching
noises.
Rain to cats is like being in the dark is to human beings. It just makes the whole world kind
of boring.
So I ran toward the kitty door, actually looking forward to the friendly smells and sounds of
home.
At least, that's what Fluffer was thinking. I was still wondering why Jake hadn't come. And I
was wondering if it was some kind of bad omen. There was a bad feeling over this whole
mission.
I knew my way around the Chapman home, both as a cat and as a human. And I was pretty
sure I knew the routine. Last time Visser Three had made contact right at eight o'clock. If
Visser Three communicated with Chapman at the same time every night, then I had arrived
right on schedule.
Chapman was sitting on the couch, same as last time. And just as I'd hoped, at three minutes
till eight he stood up and headed down toward the basement.
My whole plan was to go down there with him. I remembered the layout of the little secret
room. I remembered the desk. I knew if I could somehow follow him down without him
seeing me and then get under the desk, I would be invisible to him, and to the Visser Three
hologram.
The problem was that the whole plan counted on Chapman not noticing me.
He headed for the basement door. I fell into step right behind him. The trick was to stay just
inches behind his feet. From there he couldn't see me. But I had to watch his feet closely. If
he hesitated, I could plow right into him. That would be a very un-catlike thing to do.
He walked. I kept pace perfectly, just behind.
He headed down the stairs. I figured this part would be easier. When people walk down stairs
they usually look where they are going. They don't turn around and look behind them.
68
But one sound, one clumsy move, and I was finished.
We reached the bottom of the stairs. Suddenly Chapman stopped dead.
I leaped behind the couch. He looked around, like he'd heard a noise.
Or maybe he just sensed something.
I froze. I didn't move a muscle.
He started on toward the door. I fell into step behind him again.
So, what's happening?
I nearly had a heart attack.
My tail puffed up. My back fur went straight up. I almost bolted.
 Chapman stopped and I nearly got entangled in his legs. His left foot moved. I dodged.
He backed up a little. I squirmed out of the way.
lt's me, Jake. What's going on, Rachel?
Jake?
Chapman opened the door of the secret room. He stepped through. I was right between his
monstrously big feet. If he happened to glance down...
But he didn't. He didn't, and when he turned around to shut the door behind him, I bolted for
the desk. I jammed my body as far back in the dark corner as I could.
I'd made it... barely. I was alive... so far.
Rachel? Can you hear me?
Jake! Where are you? You scared me half to death. 
Are we okay? He sounded concerned.
Me, I was just angry.
What do you MEAN are WE okay? I yelled silently. Where are you?
Well... I'm kind of on you.
On me? Jake, this is not the time to be playing jokes. 
Chapman sat down at the desk. His feet pushed beneath the desk, just narrowly missing me as
I
once again dodged nimbly out of the way.
69
Sorry. I can't exactly see.
I kept my eyes focused on Chapman's feet.
Cats have incredible powers of concentration. I focused hard on those big feet, each almost as
big as I was. I had to stay out of their way. That was the key to staying alive.
Jake, we're in kind of a situation here. In like ten words or less, where are you
In ten words or less, I morphed, Jake said. I'm a flea.
Excuse me? It would have been funny if I hadn't been so terrified. Are you telling me
you morphed into a flea? A flea?
Yeah. I'm on your back. Or your head. I can't tell. I don't really have eyes. At least not eyes
that see anything I can understand. I mean, all I know is warm or not warm. I... I think I can
sense blood. That's about it. And I can kind of sense motion. Like when your hair stood up, I
knew there was something going on around me.
Jake, this is sick. This is beyond sick. What is the matter with you? A flea? Are you insane?
Just being a lizard made you sick. This is way worse. 
Actually, it's kind of okay, he said. I mean, I don't know how to explain it, but the flea
mind is so limited it's not hard at all to control. All it knows is to move toward the sense of
warm blood, and eat. It's like... I don't know, like in a way I'm not even really in the flea
because I can't see much or sense much. I expected it to be horrible, but when Cassie and
Marco and I
tested it out -"
They're in on this with you? Of course! That's why Cassie had made such a point of
patting my head. She was depositing Jake on me.
Rachel, we were worried about you. We figured someone should go along with you. Tobias
said -
Ah, so Tobias is in on this, too. 
Tobias said you were not telling us every thing. He wasn't sure why, or what it was you
weren't telling. 
I sighed inwardly. I guess it's good to have friends who care about you. But on the other
hand, Jake had practically made me run into Chapman. Besides, the idea of Jake morphing
into a flea and crawling around in my fur just gave me the worst creeps you can imagine.
Suddenly the brilliant light went on.
Visser Three appeared in the room.
Jake. The Visser is here in hologram. So don't distract me, okay? We're hiding under the
desk about half an inch away from Chapman's foot. 
70
Oh. But it doesn't matter if he sees you, right? I mean, he'll just figure you're the cat. No
biggie. So you shouldn't be acting suspicious. 
I hesitated. Oh, well, it would have to come out sooner or later. Um, Jake? That thing I
didn't tell you? It's that Visser Three saw me in here last time. He told Chapman he should
probably just... you know... kill me. He was worried I might be an Andalite in morph. 
For a while Jake didn't say anything. I had the feeling he was trying to keep himself from
yelling at me. He failed.
Rachel, are you CRAZY? You came back down here after that? Are you INSANE?
But just then Chapman began to speak. "Welcome, Visser. Iniss two two six of the Sulp
Niaar pool submits to you. May the Kandrona shine and strengthen you."
"And you," Visser Three said curtly. "Report."
"I have four new voluntary hosts, Visser," Chapman said. "Two are children recruited
through The Sharing, the front organization. Of the two adults one is an agent for the FBI, a
sort of policeman. He may be very -"
"FOOL!" Visser Three's artificial voice was flat, but still carried a load of anger. "Do I care
about a handful of hosts? What have you learned of the Andalite bandits?"
"Visser, what can I do... unless they show themselves?"
"They used Earth animals in the attack on the pool," Visser Three said. "They used powerful,
dangerous Earth animals. Find out how they obtained such morphs. My experts here tell me
such animals are rare on this part of the planet."
"Yes, Visser. I will do -"
"Yes. You will.
And we have another matter. We need six more human-Controllers, suitable for work as
guards. They will be used to increase the guard around the Kandrona."
What's happening? Jake asked.
Chapman is getting reamed by Visser Three. 
Too bad Marco isn't here. He'd enjoy seeing Chapman get chewed out.
He wants us bad, I said. Or at least he wants the Andalites he thinks we are. He's put ting
extra guards around the Kandrona. Human-Controllers.
That's interesting, maybe he'll -
The foot moved too quickly. The point of the shoe hit me in the ribs.
71
"Mrrrraaaoowwww!"
Chapman pushed back from the desk. He passed right through the Visser Three hologram.
For a\second I saw them united, as if they were one horrible creature.
"What's happening?" Visser Three demanded.
Chapman stared at me, horror and fury in his eyes.
I flattened my ears back against my skull. My claws came out. My teeth were bared.
"It's the animal, Visser. The cat," Chapman said in a voice full of loathing and fear.
Visser Three seemed to make a seething, half-hissing noise.
"You should have killed it when I told you to, Iniss two two six."
"But Visser -" Chapman protested.
"And yet it all works out to my advantage," Visser Three said. "Now there can be no doubt
that this cat is one of the Andalite bandits."
Jake? We're busted, I said. We're busted really bad.
72
Chapter Sixteen
"We will no longer have to search for the Andalites," Visser Three said. "We have one right
here with us."
"Shall I kill it?" Chapman asked.
"No. Don't kill it. Seize it. Seize it now, be fore it can morph back into Andalite shape. By the
time I am done with this one, we will have them all! It has been a long time since I tortured a
proud Andalite warrior. But I know how to break them. Seize it and bring it to me!"
Chapman knew better than to argue.
Chapman dived. His hands were open wide, grabbing for me.
I was trapped! No way out. No way to open that door and escape.
Trapped!
No sensible choice but to surrender.
But the cat and I were in agreement on this: You never surrender.
I felt my claws extend. My pupils were wide, ready to see every tiny movement. My ears
were flattened back against my skull. My needle-sharp teeth were bared. My liquid steel
muscles were coiled.
Chapman's hand seemed to slow down. It was like he was moving in slow motion.
Everything seemed slower to my heightened cat senses. Only I was moving at normal speed.
My paw lashed out. My claws bit flesh. I saw three bright red tracks on the back of
Chapman's hand.
I could smell the blood that flowed.
"Ahhhhh!" Chapman howled. He backed away.
"Get it!" Visser Three shouted.
What's going on? Jake wondered. I feel like we're bouncing around a lot. 
Chapman got a determined look on his face. He came at me again. I was cornered. No way
out.
I slashed. Chapman cried out. My claws were lacerating him, tearing furrows in
his arms and hands.
He grabbed me around the middle. The cat in me hated being grabbed that way.
Hated it a lot.
I brought my teeth into it. I was a ten-pound bundle of lightning-fast claws and teeth.
Chapman's hands looked like raw hamburger.
73
"A magnificent animal!" Visser Three commented. "Twist it around. Hold it with your fore
arm. That's right."
I did a lot of damage. Believe me, Chapman got hurt.
But in the end, no matter how tough I was, I was just ten pounds of killer. Chapman was
about eighteen times bigger.
He got his forearm around my chest. He had me pressed back against his chest. My front legs
were pinned. With his other arm he managed to grab my hind legs.
All I could do was bite.
I bit. I bit again and again. But although I could hurt him, I couldn't kill him. I couldn't stop
him. His fear of Visser Three was greater than the pain I was causing.
"Bring it to me," Visser Three said enthusiastically. "Bring it to me. I will come to collect it
at the nearest landing site."
"Visser, what if it... Owww!... What if it resumes its Andalite shape?"
"You have weapons. If it tries to remorph, kill it."
"Yes... Ahhhh!... Rotten little beast! Yes, Visser. I will go directly."
"We will deal with this Andalite bandit. And bring the girl, too."
"The girl... Melissa?" Chapman asked.
"I have been indulgent too long. This Andalite spy has penetrated your home. It is because of
the girl. I have already chosen the Yeerk for her. Bring her with the Andalite. Obey me, Iniss
two two six. Or prepare to face the Vanarx."
Visser Three's hologram disappeared.
Chapman suddenly threw me across the room. I twisted in midair and brought my legs
around for the landing. I hit the floor and skidded.
Okay, something is definitely going on out there. 
By the time I was up, Chapman had reached his desk and opened a drawer. His bloody hand
came out with a small pistol-like device I had seen before. It was a handheld Dracon beam.
Chapman leveled the weapon at me. He was shaking. His face seemed to be twitching. The
weapon jerked a little with each spasm. But I knew he would still have gotten me if I had
tried to move.
Are you going to tell me what's going on? Jake demanded. A few seconds ago I felt an
other warm body close by. And I think I'm sensing blood. 
74
We're in kind of a mess, I said.
What kind of a mess, Jake asked.
Chapman has a Dracon beam pointed at me. He knows I'm not exactly a cat. He thinks I'm
an Andalite. He's taking me to Visser Three. 
Oh. This is bad. 
It gets worse. Visser Three wants Melissa, too. 
Chapman opened the door a crack. "Get down here! Now!" he yelled upstairs. I guess he saw
my eyes flick toward the door. He made a fierce, vicious grin. "Try it, Andalite. Go ahead
and try it. I'd love the excuse to fry you."
I decided not to head for the door.
"You've made life very difficult for me," Chapman said. "Very difficult. If I have to let Visser
Three take the girl, my host will make life annoying for me. Do you know how tiring it is to
have an uncooperative host? No, of course you don't. But trust me, Andalite: I will gladly
kill you."
Ms. Chapman appeared at the door. "What is it?"
"This cat is one of the Andalite bandits in a morph. Visser Three wants him. Get me the
cage we use to take him to the vet."
Ms. Chapman nodded and disappeared. What's going on now? Jake asked.
Ms. Chapman is getting a cage, I said. I was feeling utterly defeated. Because of me, the
Yeerks were going to take Melissa. I had failed. I had made a mess of things.
Ms. Chapman brought the cage. She opened the little barred door.
"In," Chapman snapped.
I didn't move.
"In," he said in a cruel whisper. "In or I'll finish you right here."
He looked like he meant it. I walked into the cage. Ms. Chapman closed the door and made
sure it was locked.
Chapman snatched up the cage and carried me to the top of the stairs. "Now," he snapped at
his wife, "go get... ungh!"
Peering through the slats in the side of the cage, I saw him stagger. His face was twitching
like he was a crazy man. He seemed to be having a hard time getting control of his mouth.
"Go... get... the... girl," he said through gritted teeth.
Ms. Chapman started to obey, but then Chapman cried out.
75
"Oh! Ungh!" He fell to his knees. "He is... urgh... he is... fighting me..."
"Host rebellion," Ms. Chapman muttered under her breath. She seemed horrified and
fascinated all at once. Then, suddenly, her left hand slapped her own face.
"Ahhhhh! Mine... mine... too."
"Stop it, Chapman," Chapman said. "Stop it or I'll break you! I'll leave you nothing but a
shell! You cannot win. No host has ever succeeded in rebelling!"
But the Chapman host wasn't giving up.
It was terrible. Terrible in a way that made you want to watch. To anyone else it would have
just looked as if our assistant principal and his wife were nuts. Chapman was talking to
himself and
twitching and contorting, still unable to get to his feet.
The hosts are fighting the Yeerks! I told Jake. The human brains are resisting. Chapman
is out of control. Ms. Chapman is trying to choke herself with her own hand. The Yeerk is
trying to regain control. It's incredible!
I can't believe it! I can't believe the hosts can fight back this hard.
lt's because of Melissa. They're fighting for their daughter.
"Aaaarrrrgh!" Chapman cried. Suddenly he lurched to his feet. "I will win, Chapman. You
cannot resist!"
And it was true. The Chapman host was losing. Iniss two two six was regaining control.
The same was happening with Ms. Chapman. The Yeerk in her head was forcing the
rebellious hand away from her throat.
But neither of the Chapmans looked good.
They're exhausted, I reported to Jake. They're regaining control, but they're both a mess.
Sweating. Pale. Still trembling and jerking.
Chapman looked at his wife. Or at least the Yeerk slug in Chapman's brain ordered his eyes
to look toward the body that was controlled by a different Yeerk. It was harder now to think
of Chapman as just being Chapman. I had seen proof that there were two creatures inside
him.
I even knew what that was like. There were two people in my head as well. I had fought to
control the shrew, just as the Chapman Yeerk now fought to control Chapman's brain.
Chapman said, "I have control again."
Ms. Chapman nodded. "Yes. But just barely. They fight fiercely for their children, these hu
mans."
76
"And they will not stop fighting. I can't maintain my cover with this host waiting to attack at
every opportunity. I have to be at the school every day. The host is beaten and exhausted for
now, but in a few days he will strike again." Chapman sounded angry and frustrated. "He's
not a fool. He knows he can't win... he knows each battle will leave him weaker and that
eventually I will triumph."
Ms. Chapman kicked my cage, like it was all my fault. "He doesn't have to win. All he has to
do is wait until you are in a meeting with parents or members of the school board, then strike.
They'll think you've lost your mind."
Chapman looked haunted. He checked his watch. "I'll take the Andalite to Visser
Three. Maybe... maybe I can make him understand."
"Go, quickly," Ms. Chapman told her hus band.
Chapman snatched up the cage I was in. He barreled through the door. He slammed me
into the doorjamb on the way.
"Daddy? Daddy? What are you doing?"
It was Melissa. She was across the living room. I hadn't seen her arrive. Where had she been?
I could only pray that she had not heard everything. If she'd heard it all, there was no hope for
her.
Chapman kept walking. Out into the wet night. "Daddy? Do you have Fluffer in there?"
lt's Melissa, I told Jake. lf she doesn't back off, she's going to force them to take her!
"Daddy?" Melissa sounded frightened now. She came running. Chapman moved quicker. The
real Chapman was helping. He knew his daughter would only make things worse if she tried
to intervene.
"Fluffer!" Melissa cried. There was only one hope. Tobias? I cried out, making my
thought-speech as loud as I could. Tobias, can you hear me?
His answer was faint, but it was Tobias.
Yes, Rachel. 
The real Fluffer! We need him. We need him right now!
Rachel, what is going on out there? Jake demanded.
"Fluffer! Why are you taking Fluffer? Daddy, stop!"
Out the front door we went. Out into the night. Melissa, sobbing pitifully. Jake, demanding
to know what was happening. Chapman, walking as fast as he could.
Melissa grabbed her father's arm. The cage wobbled wildly.
77
"Daddy, you can't take Fluffer. Don't take him away! What are you doing?"
The car. I could see it in the driveway. We were almost there.
Suddenly, I heard a yowling, yammering, high-pitched sound that started as a hiss and ended
as a shriek.
Like a bullet he came, racing across the lawn. The real Fluffer.
He was running like every monster in the world was right behind him.
In the darkness the humans couldn't see what was scaring Fluffer so badly. But with my cat
eyes I could see perfectly. Just a few feet off the ground, like some dark shadow of death,
came Tobias.
Fluffer must have recognized his cage. He must have figured that if he just got inside he'd be
safe from the talons of the raptor that pursued him.
Fluffer leaped toward the cage. He glommed onto it and tried to dig his claws into the plastic.
For one frozen instant Fluffer McKitty saw something he never expected to see. Fluffer saw
himself.
It was almost as weird for me. The cat in my head was totally baffled. This new cat smelled
exactly like himself. This did not make any sense at all. It meant nothing. It wasn't even a
part of any cat reality. The human part of me noticed a small cut on Fluffer's head. Tobias
had taken a good swipe at him to get him moving in the right direction.
"Fluffer?" Melissa said. "But..." She tried to peer inside the cage.
Chapman was quick. "No, sweetheart," he said. "This isn't Fluffer at all. It's some other cat
that sneaked into the basement. He's different. I'm taking him to the shelter so his owners can
pick
him up."
"But why didn't you just tell me that?"
Chapman looked confused. "I... I didn't notice you."
Melissa stepped back like she'd been slapped. "But Daddy, I was crying."
"Sorry." Chapman shrugged. He shoved the cage into the backseat.
We drove off. I breathed a sigh of relief. I knew Melissa wasn't safe yet, but she was
safe for now, at least.
Good work, Tobias, I said. But I don't think he could hear me. And I couldn't see out of the
windows, so I didn't know if he or Marco or Cassie were anywhere close.
Jake? You still with me?
78
Yes. Do you have a minute to fill me in? This flea existence is fine for hiding, but I can't tell
anything about what's going on. 
I'm in a cat carrier. Chapman's in the front seat. He watches me through the rearview mirror.
He still has the Dracon beam. I think maybe I'm in pretty big trouble here.
We're not beaten yet, Jake said.
Jake, time must be getting short. It's been at least an hour. You must have morphed before
me. You need to get away and morph back.
We still have time, Jake said.
You have a watch, Jake? I asked. I don't think so. You're what, about twice the size of a
period on the page of a book? You can't risk being trapped in a flea morph. Besides, there's
nothing you can do.
We hadn't traveled far before the car started bouncing and rattling over rough road.
As soon as we get outside you need to jump off, Jake, I said. Just make yourself jump
away from warmth and away from the smell of blood. You can do that 
The car came to a stop.
Rachel, there is no way I'm going to leave you alone. 
I knew he was trying to be brave, but he was making me mad. Jake, we're trapped. He's got
a Dracon beam and I'm in a cage. Visser Three is coming to get me. I can't morph back or
they'll see I'm human. Chapman will recognize me. How long do you think it will take them
to figure out who the rest of us are? It would be the end of us all. The end of the Animorphs.
The end of the only hope for stopping these guys. Come on, Jake, you know it's true.
We're not beaten yet, Jake repeated stubbornly.
The only hope is for me to stay in cat morph, I said. They'll probably... you know...
but at least they'll never find out about the rest of you. Now jump off me. 
Chapman got out of the car. He came around and opened the back door.
"Time to meet the Visser, Andalite. He'll have a wonderful time with you."
Chapman lifted me out of the backseat. I looked out through the bars.
We're at the construction site, I told Jake. Now get off me. 
I'm not -
 I couldn't argue with Jake anymore. I was afraid now. Afraid. I could picture what Visser
Three might do to me.
79
Sorry, Jake, but this time I'm the boss, I said. I cocked my rear leg and started scratching
in that rapid catlike way.
What the... what are you doing?
I'm scratching. I want you off me. 
Okay, okay, Jake said. Just stop it. It's like an earthquake here. Okay, Rachel. You're
right. We've lost this battle. 
80
Chapman carried the cage into the construction site. I could see the ground go by beneath me.
I could see through the bars all the half-built cinderblock buildings. I could see the very spot
where the five of us had cowered in terror while Visser Three had morphed into a monster
and swallowed the Andalite prince.
The Andalite's last despairing cry came back to me. He had lost his fight. Now I was losing
mine.
Maybe there was no hope. Maybe we were fools to even try and resist the Yeerks.
Get out of here, Jake. I said.
Okay, Rachel. Here I go. Look... be strong, Rachel. 
Yeah, Jake. You too. 
Jumping...
A few seconds later, Chapman put me down on the ground. He waited beside the cage. The
two of us stared off into the darkness.
I decided to make sure Jake was gone. Jake? Jake?
No answer.
Jake, answer me. I've changed my mind. I want you to stay with me.  If he had lied to me,
he would answer now.
Come on, Jake, I've changed my mind. I need you. 
No answer. He was truly gone. That fact filled me with grim satisfaction. If Jake and the
others survived, there would still be some hope.
But the feeling of loneliness was awful.
Then I heard the sound of something large, moving swiftly in the air. I pressed my head
against the door and looked up. Three craft were descending toward the construction site.
Two of them were smaller, about the size of one of those recreational vehicles, maybe a little
larger. They had a cowled, insectlike look. They looked like beetles with twin long, serrated
spears pointed forward on each side. The Andalite had called them Bug fighters.
The third craft was much larger, shaped like an angular battle-ax. It was black on black,
sharp, and deadly looking. As it sank slowly to ward us I felt my fear grow.
It was not the cat that was afraid. It was me, the human. The cat didn't know what this ship
was. I did. I had seen it before. The Andalite had called it a Blade ship.
It was the personal ship of Visser Three. And terror seemed to flow from it. I could smell the
fear sweat on Chapman.
81
I guess I was glad he was scared, too. Maybe Visser Three would become the Vanarx and
suck the Chapman Yeerk out of Chapman's head. Maybe the true Chapman would experience
a few seconds of freedom before he was killed. Maybe the Chapman Yeerk would suffer
before Visser Three finished him off.
Maybe.
Fear is like a worm inside you. It eats you. It chews your guts. It bores holes in your heart. It
makes you feel hollow. Empty. Alone.
Fear.
The Blade ship landed between two half- finished buildings. The Bug fighters came to rest on
either side. They looked so strange, parked between the yellow-painted earthmovers and
graders in the construction site.
The earthmovers looked like toys. The alien craft looked like deadly weapons.
I was afraid. I tried to borrow the cat's courage, his indifference. But then the door of the
Blade ship opened. I had no courage.
Only fear.
82
Chapter Seventeen
Visser Three in person is worse than Visser Three as a hologram. There's nothing horrible
about him. Not when he's in his normal Andalite body, at least. Andalites are strange-looking,
that's for sure. But they aren't frightening.
But I had met a real Andalite. You could feel the difference between a real Andalite and the
evil beast that was Visser Three. It was like he glowed with some dark light. A light that cast
a shadow over your mind.
Visser Three. Even Chapman feared him.
Around the Visser, two Hork-Bajir guards deployed. Each was holding a Dracon beam, not
that Hork-Bajir ever looked like they needed weapons. They were weapons. Marco had
called them walking Salad Shooters. They were living razor blades. Wickedly curved blades
raked forward from their foreheads. More blades were at their elbows and wrists. Their feet
were like Tobias's talons, only much bigger, like Tyrannosaur feet.
They were seven feet tall, maybe a little more, with a spiked tail. The Andalite had told us
that the Hork-Bajir were a good people, enslaved by the Yeerks, just the same way the
Yeerks wanted to enslave humans. But it was hard to look at a Hork-Bajir and think they had
ever been anything but killing machines.
Behind the Hork-Bajir came four Taxxons.
Imagine a centipede. Now imagine a centipede twice the length of a man and just as big\
around. Imagine that the centipede holds the upper third of its body erect. Imagine pointed
legs like steel pins below, and smaller legs with little claws as you get closer to the head. Not
that it has a real head. There are four separate globs that look like chopped-up red Jell-O that
are the Taxxon's eyes. And at the very top , a mouth. The mouth is perfectly round an lined
with row after row of small, needle teeth.
The Andalite told us that the Taxxons are all voluntary hosts. They are allies of the Yeerks.
And yet, as horrible as the Hork-Bajir and the Taxxons were, it was Visser Three who made
your skin crawl.
Without the hologram communicator, the Visser communicated in the usual Andalite fashion.
He thought-spoke, much like we all did when we were in morph.
That is the Andalite bandit? he asked Chapman.
"Yes, Visser."
Visser Three advanced toward me, almost mincing on his delicate Andalite legs, looking like
a cross between a deer, a human, and a scorpion. He aimed his main eyes at me. His stalk
eyes canned the area, always watchful. He brought his face close to the cage.
I was staring right into his face. I could see the nose slits open and close as he breathed. I
could see the large, almond-shaped eyes narrow as he peered inside to get a better look at me.
83
He was only inches away. I should have tried to reach through the bars and at least bloody
him a little.
But the fear was all over me. I was sick with terror. I'm not ashamed to admit it. I couldn't
stand his eyes watching me. I turned away, afraid to look.
Not so brave now, my Andalite friend? Visser Three asked.
It was the first time any of us had ever been spoken to directly by the Visser. His voice was
in my head, threatening and cruel and foul beyond description. It was a voice full of power --
and hate. When he called me an Andalite, I almost burst out,
"No, no, Visser, not an Andalite. A human. A human!"
It was like I could feel the terrible force of his will battering me. In an instant I knew: I would
never survive his questioning. I would tell him everything. His power was a million times
greater than mine. His will was a vast, huge, irresistible thing. And what was I? Just some
foolish little girl. A foolish, lost girl. Lost.
And yet, even as I felt my own mind wither before the black terror of Visser Three, another
mind came forward.
I was not alone. There was another in my head with me. Someone whose species memory
had no images of Visser Three. Fluffer. Fluffer's mind contained fears, but they were
different from my fears. Fluffer feared big predator birds. Fluffer feared loud aggressive
dogs. Fluffer feared dominant male cats.
But Fluffer was not at all impressed by Visser Three.
On the edge of absolute panic, I let the cat in my mind take over. I sank back,
hiding behind the calm cat brain.
Visser Three took the cage from Chapman. He lifted it up so he could see inside
better.
And what did I do? What did Fluffer do? He stuck his little pink nose up against the bars and
sniffed the air.
Fluffer wanted to find out what this creature was, and that meant getting a good smell of him.
This is similar to the orange-and-black creature that invaded the pool. Visser Three said.
It took me a second to track on this. Then I realized: He meant Jake. Jake had been in his
tiger morph when we battled in the Yeerk pool.
"Yes, Visser," Chapman said. "They are a family of animals. Felines. These are the
smallest."
I see you damaged my servant Iniss two two six, Andalite, Visser Three said to me. No
one ever accused you Andalites of lacking courage. You are a race of fools, but brave. 
84
What was I supposed to say? Thank you?
Why not answer me, Andalite? I know you hear my words. This charade is pointless. I
know what you are. 
I said nothing. I tried to think nothing. I was afraid that if I said anything he would instantly
know I was not an Andalite. And if he realized I was human... the others would never be
safe. I had to stay in this body.
I had to die in this body, and take my secret with me.
Visser Three put my cage back down. Now. Where is the girl? I have promised her to Iniss
four five five. Iniss four five five is a spawn mate of yours, I believe. We will do the
infestation aboard the mother ship, and I will have the girl returned tomorrow. Where is
she?
"Visser... I..." Chapman said.
The mask of politeness dropped from Visser Three in a microsecond. Even my cat eyes could
barely follow his movements, they were so swift. Visser Three grabbed Chapman around the
neck. His Andalite tail arched forward. The dagger point of the tail was in Chapman's face.
Do you defy me? It was like a hiss. The hiss of a snake.
"N-n-n-o, no, Visser." Chapman was shaking like a leaf. "I would never defy you. It's only..
. the host. Chapman. He and the woman rebelled."
Aren't you able to control your host? Visser Three sneered.
Do you think the Andalite mind that still lives in this body never resists? Do you imagine
that your human host is more powerful than my own Andalite host?"
This wasn't going very well for Chapman. Either the real, human Chapman, or the humanController
that called itself Chapman.
"Visser, I... I only report the facts to you. M-m-my host is under control. But I am constantly
in contact with humans. I occupy a responsible position in their society. I cannot have my
host body causing me to twitch and shake. Humans see such things as signs of mental illness.
I could lose my position. And I would no longer be of any use to you."
You are barely of use to me now, Visser Three sneered.
"Visser, my host begs leave to address you directly," Chapman said.
Visser Three hesitated. I saw his stalk eyes scan around, checking for any signs
of threat. In stinctively I looked around, too.
I had no way of knowing how well Visser Three's borrowed An dalite eyes could see in
the dark. But for me the darkness was no barrier.
I looked. I didn't even know what I was looking for. But all I saw were the Hork-Bajir
85
and the Taxxons, the Yeerk ships, silent and dark, and the buildings and forlorn construction
equipment of the site.
Then I caught a glimpse of movement. It was in the woods that bordered the construction
site. A swift side-to-side movement, just the sort of thing my cat eyes noticed best. But when
I stared closer, I saw no further movement. Probably just another Hork-Bajir patroling.
I will allow the host to address me, Visser Three said.
I craned my head up as well as I could to watch. For a moment, nothing changed. Then,
suddenly, Chapman sagged. It was like he was a marionette and someone had cut his strings.
He collapsed, straight down. His legs just twisted up under him.
He tried to stand up. But it was as if he didn't know how to make his legs work. They would
jerk and suddenly kick out, but he could not stand. Finally, he gave up.
"Fisher," he mumbled. "Fisher Hree. Sor... I... sorry. Visher. Visser.
Visser Three."
The real, human Chapman had been out of control of his own body for so long he no longer
remembered how to move or speak.
"Visser Three," he said again. His voice was slurry and strange.

Speak, you fool, Visser Three snapped. Do you think I can stay here forever?
"Visser Three. You... We had a deal. You know I never wanted to join you. My wife did. But
I said no. But... but then my wife... no longer my wife by then, of course." Suddenly he
began to cry. I could see his tears very clearly. "My wife who was no longer my wife... my
wife who was one of your creatures... threatened... threatened to give you my daughter."
Chapman managed to raise one clumsy hand to his eyes. "I forgive her. She was weak. And
you feed on weakness."
Yes, yes, get to the point, Visser Three said.
A Hork-Bajir moved closer. He muttered something to the Visser, then moved away. I
couldn't hear or understand what the Hork-Bajir had said, but it looked as if he was
reminding Visser Three that they shouldn't hang around too long.
"The point is," Chapman said, "that I agreed to be made into a host. I agreed to... to..." He
looked like he was about to throw up. "I agreed to surrender my freedom. To become a
Controller. To accept this filthy thing in my head. To accept your control. I agreed... but
only if you would spare my daughter."
It felt like my heart had stopped beating. Chapman had become a Controller to save Melissa?
He had given more than his life to save his daughter?
The situation has changed, Visser Three said. The Chapman person is an important part
of our work. We cannot have him endangered by some uncontrollable human.

"The girl -- Melissa -- is no threat. But..." Chapman struggled to lift himself up once
86
again with clumsy legs and awkward arms.
He rose to his knees. Then slowly, slowly, he stood up. He was wobbling and swaying, but he
was standing. "The girl is no threat," he repeated in a stronger, moreconfident voice. "But I
am."
87
Chapter Eighteen
 You? A threat? Visser Three laughed. He reached out with one hand to push lightly on
Chapman's chest. Chapman fell back, sprawled out on the dirt. His head was just inches from
the door of my cage. Tears were streaming down the side of his face.
"If you harm my daughter I will fight you. I will fight you forever. Ask your Yeerk if he
believes me. He knows me better than anyone. Ask Iniss two two six if I will fight for my
daughter."
Chapman closed his eyes. The tears stopped. Then his eyes opened again. He picked himself
up quickly from the ground and stood before Visser Three. The Yeerk slug was in charge
again. He was once again a Controller.
Before he stood, I saw something that frightened me all over again. It was Chapman's watch.
The time was now nine twenty-eight. I had about seventeen minutes before I hit the two-hour
limit!
The host will attempt to disrupt your work?
"Yes, Visser. And the woman as well. She is not as strong as this one, but she was able to
gain control of one hand. Perhaps she has deeper strengths than we knew." He hesitated
before going on. I could still smell the fear on him. "I am of more use with a passive,
voluntary host. But I am your tool, Visser. I will do as you com mand."
Yes, you will certainly do as I command, Visser Three said. But you have brought me the
Andalite bandit. He nodded down at me. And this will occupy my time for a little while.
Leave the girl, for now. Now get out. You tempt my patience. 
Chapman didn't need a second invitation. He jumped in the car and tore out of there.
Melissa was safe. As safe as she would ever be with Chapman as her father. That was some
thing. Not much, but something.
Move out, Visser Three yelled. I saw the Hork-Bajir respond instantly to his command.
The nearest one snatched me up and suddenly we were moving fast toward the Blade ship.
In seconds it would all be over. I would be aboard the Visser's ship. I would leave Earth. The
only thing in my future was pain. Maybe I would die before I betrayed my friends. A
depressing kind of thing to hope for.
So. What's happening now?
"Mrrraaaoww!"
I jumped and spun around inside my cage.
Jake? Is that you?
Who else would it be? You know anyone else who would be a talking flea riding on your
back?
88
Jake, you were supposed to get away and be safe!
Yeah, right. Like I was going to abandon you. Listen, I could hear Visser Three's
thought-speech, but I don't know where we are.
We are about ten feet away from being loaded into Visser Three's Blade ship. And I have
about fifteen minutes left before I'm trapped in this morph. 
Fifteen minutes? Great, if you have fifteen, I have ten. I had to morph earlier than
you, remember.
Jake, get out of here! You can't be trapped as a flea!
The door of the Blade ship slid open silently. I could see dark red light inside. I could see a
handful of Taxxons that seemed to be standing over control panels of some sort. Hork-Bajir
stood at attention.
I'm not getting out of here. Jake said. None of us are. 
None of... You mean the rest are fleas, too?
No, but they should be around somewhere. Tobias was supposed to follow us and lead the
others to wherever we ended up. 
They can't do anything. 
Oh, really? Well, I bet they'll try. 
Just at that moment I heard a strange sound. My cat brain didn't recognize it. But the human
me did. It was an engine. A big engine. Like a big truck. Or maybe a tractor. Or -
An earthmover.
The Hork-Bajir carrying me saw it, too.
He ran into the Blade ship and tossed me down.
Then he ran back to the Visser, who waited in the doorway.
I think they've started one of the earth-movers, I told Jake.
Then I guess it's time for me to get into this fight, Jake said. I'm going to try a quick
double- morph. Hope it works. Here goes nothing. Yeeee-haaah!
All at once, through the open door of the Blade ship, I spotted the earthmover. It lumbered at
a painfully slow speed. But it lumbered right toward the Blade ship.
Get us into the air! Visser Three shouted.
The nearest Taxxon said something in their slithery snake-speech. It sounded like "Sssree
shway
89
snerp snerrrrup ssreet."
Two minutes to liftoff? Too long! Visser Three said. His tail whipped forward. I saw a
huge gash open in the flesh of the Taxxon. Greenish- yellow goo poured out.
The other Taxxons all looked kind of excited. They were waving their little upper arms and
snapping their little claws.
You and you.  Visser Three pointed at two of the Taxxons.  Get us off the ground! The
rest of you may feed on this fool. 
The wounded Taxxon emitted a wailing, slithery scream. Three other Taxxons rushed at him.
Their circular mouths fastened onto their fellow Taxxon's writhing flesh and began chewing
and tearing at him.
The sound of the diesel engine grew louder. Visser Three was rapping out orders. Hork-Bajir
ran through the door and back outside.
Then I saw something happening in the dark corner of the cabin, over past the horrific
Taxxon feeding frenzy. Something was growing. A human being was growing out of nothing.
Jake!
Can't talk. Don't distract me. 
Visser Three was in a rage. You could feel the waves of his anger radiating around the small
space. Destroy that machine! he ordered.
Outside, two Hork-Bajir took aim at the five tons of slow-moving steel.
Jake was still cowering in the corner, but he had begun to change once again. In the darkness
my cat eyes could see the beginning of a pattern of stripes. Black and orange. The stripes of a
tiger.
It was time for me to do my part. I concentrated. I felt the change begin. The cage grew small
around me.
Rumble rumble rumble. The earthmover closed in.
The near-dead Taxxon screamed as his fellow Taxxons ate him alive.
Suddenly I saw a brilliant red light.
There was a sizzling sound. I saw the earthmover disintegrate. My heart was in my throat.
Marco! Cassie! Had they gotten away?
I had to concentrate. I had to ignore the Taxxon's screams. I had to stop wondering whether
Cassie and Marco had been on that earthmover when it was hit. I had to control my morph.
Not too far, Rachel. Not too much. I could not become human. Not totally human. I looked
down at my paw. Short stubby fingers had appeared. I stuck my stubby half-human fingers
through the bars of the cage and found the lock.
90
One of the feeding Taxxons looked away from his meal just long enough. "Yeerss srenn
ssseere!" It waved its creepy front legs in my direction.
Visser Three snapped around and glared at me with ferocious hatred.
I opened the door of my cage.
"Rrrrraaawwwrrr!" Jake leaped through the air, his huge claws outstretched.
I flew out of the cage, a clumsy mass of fur and skin, a creature that was half-cat and
half-human.

Jake hit Visser Three in the side.
This time, you're mine, you jerk!
Visser Three fell over, tangled up in tiger. His deadly tail flashed but missed. Jake
ripped the Visser's flesh with claws infinitely bigger than mine.
Aaaaarrrgghhh!
It was a great pleasure hearing Visser Three scream that way. But I had other things to worry
about.
I couldn't move in my half-morph. I concentrated on regaining my cat form. I had only
minutes left before the two hours would be up.
Jake rolled off Visser Three just as a handful of Hork-Bajir rushed to the Visser's defense.
Run! Jake yelled.
Run! I agreed.
We ran. I was back fully in Fluffer's shape. I could do thirty miles an hour, as fast as the
fastest human being could run.
Unfortunately, Hork-Bajir are faster.
Jake was faster still, for short distances. Fast enough to outrun the Hork-Bajir that were after
us. But he wasn't going to leave me behind.
Jake turned and came for the closest Hork-Bajir.
I saw him flying over my head, a huge beast, orange-and-black striped. The Hork-Bajir
went down hard.
Get outta here, Rachel! You're too small to fight these guys. 
But there was still another Hork-Bajir on my\tail. Faster than me. Too fast!
91
I dodged left. The Hork-Bajir shot past me. I turned back sharply, my little pads scrabbling in
the dirt. The Hork-Bajir grabbed for me but missed.
Something else was moving. Something big. The ground was rumbling....
A second earthmover was grinding forward on its tank treads. Marco and Cassie had started
another earthmover!
I raced toward the nearest half-finished building. I had to get away. And I had to morph
back. Time was up. In minutes I would be trapped!
I saw a dark hole. I flew toward it in a single leap. The hole led under a wall. Then it opened
into a shallow basement. There was a concrete floor about two feet over my head. I was safe!
Safe, and with room enough to morph back to human shape.
I tried to concentrate. Out beyond my little concrete shelter I heard growls and alien cries. I
heard the rumble of the earthmover. I thought I heard the sizzle of Dracon beams.
Human, I told myself. Return to human. Only minutes left!
Then I felt a shattering noise. Then another. Another. It was like some giant was stomping
around. The giant steps stopped. I was frozen, unable to even think, let alone morph.
Crash!
All around me pillars of rock-hard, scaled flesh, each as big around as a tree trunk,
ripped into the concrete.
Grrrunch!
The concrete was lifted off me. Torn away, like it was paper.
I was exposed. Trapped. And standing over me, with the shattered concrete floor in its
mighty hand, was a beast that seemed to be made of living rock.
You won't get away so easily, Visser Three said.
92
Chapter Nineteen
It was all over. I knew I was done for.
Nothing in the world could stop the beast Visser Three
had morphed into.
He was twenty feet tall. As tall as a telephone pole. He stood on three massive legs, each as
big around as a redwood tree. He had a tiny head, not much bigger than a human head. He
would have looked funny, except that there was nothing funny about what he was doing.
With two long, mighty arms he was casually tearing up the concrete. He slammed his fingers
into the cement. He ripped it up in slabs and tossed them over his shoulder.
One of the slabs hit a Hork-Bajir and crushed him. I don't think Visser Three even noticed or
cared.
I ran.
Crash!
One of the Visser's huge hands slammed down in front of me.
I scampered back and turned.
Crash!
Another hand like living rock slammed in front of me.
Even the cat in me knew- it was hopeless.
Visser Three glared down at me with tiny bright eyes in that weirdly small head. He reached
for me with both hands, cupped together, forming a wall around me.
C-R-R-R-U-N-C-H!
Visser Three hesitated.
B-O-O-O-O-M!
I bolted.
I leaped to the top of a wall. Six feet straight up, and trust me, as scared as I was, I could have
jumped even higher.
Out of the corner of my eye I saw what had happened. The earthmover had ground forward
and slammed into one of the Bug fighters. The Bug fighter had exploded.
AAAAARRRRGGGHHH!
Visser Three roared in fury. I did not envy the Hork-Bajir and Taxxons who had let that
earthmover get through.
93
I ran along the top of the wall. It was cinderblock, full of holes and only a few inches wide. It
was a much tougher challenge than the balance beam in gymnastics. But I was running as
fast as a very scared kitty can run.
l'll kill you ALL! FOOLS! Visser Three screamed. I hoped he would just forget about me.
But then I heard the thunder of his walk. In two steps he had caught up to me.
His huge hand swept toward me.
It was ten feet to the ground, and the ground was covered with rusted, twisted metal.
I had no choice. I leaped.
The sharp metal was rushing up at me. Visser Three's hand was sweeping toward me.
Something sharp bit into my back.
The ground was no longer rushing up at me/ Instead, I was zooming through the air.
Jeez, Rachel. Next time you want to morph into a kitty, pick one who doesn't eat so much!
Tobias!
I can get you as far as the trees, that's it, Tobias said.
I have to morph back, I said. My time is up!
We flew toward the trees. Tobias strained to keep us in the air. I knew he was at his limit
of endurance.
Drop me, now!
We were in the trees. Tobias dropped me. I fell through the air. But my tail pivoted and kept
my balance perfect.
A tree branch!
Slam!
My claws dug into the bark.
I was already morphing back as I dropped to the ground and landed on soft pine needles.
Through the trees I could see the huge beast that was Visser Three rampaging in a fury. The
few Hork-Bajir that were left were tossed around like toys. Taxxons were crushed under his
feet.
I think he's mad we got away, Tobias said.
"Jake? The others?" I demanded. "Did they make it?"
94
They're fine. Jake had to morph back into human shape before going into the tiger morph,
so he didn't have a problem with the time. Marco got his feathers a little singed, but he's
okay. Cassie, too. 
I collapsed on the ground. I had escaped. I had survived. I knew I should have been glad.
But all I felt was tired.
95
Chapter 20
Melissa was at our next gymnastics class. She was still alive. Still free.
I acted nonchalant as I changed into my leotard and stretched out. But I did watch when she
opened her locker and pulled out the envelope.
She opened it and read the words I had put there.
"Melissa, your father loves you more than you will ever know. And more than he can ever
show you. Signed, someone who knows."
I'd printed it out on my word processor, of course, so she wouldn't recognize my handwriting.
Maybe it was just my imagination, but she seemed more into the practice that day.
After my mom picked me up and drove me home, I hooked up with the others. We hadn't
gotten together for a couple of days, since the battle at the construction site. I guess I felt like
I had some things to think about.
"How is Melissa?" Cassie asked. I shrugged. "I left her a note." I told them what it had said.
"I know it's bad for security, Jake. And Marco, I know it was sentimental. But I don't care.
Chapman gave up everything to save his daughter from being made into a host. I had to do
something."
Jake nodded. "It's okay. Maybe it will help."
Cassie smiled at me, telling me she was proud of what I'd done. Marco rolled his eyes,
but he didn't say anything.
"Well, we destroyed a Yeerk Bug fighter. We made Visser Three nervous. And -"
"- and we came out alive," Marco finished.
"Yeah, that too," Jake agreed with a grin. "That's a very important thing to do."
"Next time we'll-" I began.
"- next time?" Marco cried out in mock horror.
There will be a next time, Tobias said. There will be a next time until the Andalites
return. 



Chapter 1
My name is Tobias. A freak of nature. One of a kind.
I won't tell you my last name. I can't tell you my last name. Or the name of the city where I
live.
I want to tell you everything, but I can't give any clues to my true identity. Or the identity of
the others. Everything I will tell you is true. I Know it's going to seem unbelievable, but
believe it anyway.
I am Tobias. I'm a normal kid, I guess. Or used to be. I used to do okay in school. Not great,
but not bad either. Just okay.
I guess I was a dweeb, kind of. Big, but not big enough to keep from getting picked on. I had
blond hair, kind of wild because I could never get it to look right. My eyes were... what
color were my eyes? It's only been a few weeks, and already I'm forgetting things about being
human.
I guess it doesn't matter, anyway. My eyes now are gold and brown. I have eyes that look
fierce and angry all the time. I'm not always fierce or angry, but I look that way.
One afternoon, I was riding the thermals, the upswelling hot air. I rode them way up into the
sky. The bottoms of low clouds, heavy with moisture, scudded just a few feet above me.
I looked down and focused my laserlike eyes. My fierce eyes, I could still read - I hadn't
forgotten how to do that. I could see the big red-and-white sign that said: DEALIN' DAN
HAWKE'S USED CARS.
I pressed my wings back, closer to my body, and began to fall.
Down, down, down! Faster. Faster!
I fell through the warm, early evening air like a rock. Like an artillery shell falling toward its
target.
All was silent except for the sound of the air rushing over the tops of my wings. The ground
came up at me. It came up like it was trying to hit me.
I saw the cage. It was no more than three feet on each side. In the cage was a hawk. A redtail.
Like me.
The man was close by. I recognized him because I had seen him on his TV commercials. He
was Dealin' Dan Hawke. He owned the car dealership.
He was the one holding the hawk prisoner.
She was a mascot. On the commercials he called her Price-Cut Polly. It made me sick. It
made me furious.
I saw the camera. There were three guys standing around. They would be shooting a live
commercial soon. I didn't care.
3
Dealin' Dan went to the hawk's cage to feed her. It was locked with a bike-style combination
lock. Four numbers. I could see them as he turned the combination. 8-1-2-5.
I was two hundred yards up, plummeting to earth at seventy miles an hour. But I could see
the numbers as he turned them. And the human part of me, Tobias, could remember.
He opened the cage and tossed in some food. Then he closed it again and spun the lock.
Brilliant lights came on. He was starting the commercial. It would be live on TV all over the
area.
What I was planning was insane. That's what Marco would have said. It was one of his
favorite words. Insane.
I didn't care.
A hawk was in a tiny cage, being used as a prop for some lowlife car dealer. That wasn't
going to go on. Not if I could help it.
"Tseeeeeeeer!" I screamed.
Twenty feet from the ground, I opened my wings. The strain was terrible. I absorbed most of
the momentum and used the rest for speed. I shot across the parked cars to the cage.
I landed on the bars and grabbed on with my talons.
I used the hook of my deadly sharp beak to click the first number into place.
"Hey! What the - " someone yelled.
The bright TV light focused right on me.
"Well, ladies and gentlemen in TV-land," Dealin' Dan yapped in surprise, "I guess we have a
bird trying to break into our Price-Cut Polly's cage. Boys, you better shoo him away."
Yeah, right. Shoo me, I thought.
I clicked the second number. There were people coming for me. I saw a mechanic swinging a
long steel wrench. But I wasn't going to leave without freeing this bird.
Hawks do not belong in cages. Hawks belong in the sky.
But they were all around me.
"Get him, Earl! Hit the thing!"
"Look out for that beak of his!"
"Maybe he's got rabies!"
WHAM!
4
The mechanic swung the wrench! It barely missed my head. I was dead if I didn't get some
help.
Fast.
Rachel? I cried silently with my mind. Rachel? Now would be a good time!
Sorry! I missed the first bus. I just got here! Her voice was in my head. We call it thoughtspeak.
It's something we can do when we morph.
I breathed a sigh of relief. Help was on the way.
"HhhuuuurrHHHHEEEEEAAAAH!"
"What in the world was - " the mechanic cried.
I knew what it was. It was Rachel. Pretty, blond Rachel. Although right at the moment she
wasn't pretty - impressive, but not pretty.
BOOM! Cr-u-u-u-nch!
"Oh. My. Lord," Dealin' Dan gasped. "Forget the bird! There's an elephant stomping over the
convertibles!"
I would have smiled. If I'd had a mouth.
I finished turning the lock. I yanked open the cage door.
The hawk was wary. She was a true hawk, with only a hawk's mind and instincts to guide
her. But she did know an open path to the sky when she saw one.
Out she came, in a rush of gray and brown and white feathers. She didn't know that I had
freed her. That kind of concept was beyond her thinking. And she felt no gratitude.
But she flapped her wings and rose into the air.
Free.
And right then I had the strangest feeling. Like I should go with her. Like I should be with
her.
Can we get out of here now? Rachel asked.
She was bellowing loudly, tossing her big trunk around and stomping various cars. Having a
very good time, by elephant standards. But it was time for us to leave. For, Rachel to resume
her human form.
I looked up again. I saw the sunlight shine through the hawk's red tail. She flew toward the
setting sun.
5
CHAPTER 2
I hear sirens, I said urgently.
I hear them, too, Rachel snapped. I have ears the size of quilts. You think I can't hear
them? I'm morphing as fast as I can.
I just hope it's real cops. Not Controllers.
We had reached a patch of woods behind Dealin' Dan's car dealership. It was really just a few
scruffy trees between the car place and a convenience store.
I watched from a low tree branch as Rachel morphed back to human again. If you've never
seen someone morph, you have no idea just how incredibly weird it is.
When she began, she was a full-grown African elephant. Ten feet tall. Almost twice that from
head to tail. She weighed at least six thousand pounds. I say "at least" because we've never
exactly tried to stick her on the bathroom scale.
She had two curved tusks, each about as long as a child. And a trunk that dragged the ground
when she walked and could pick up a big slashing, yelling, dangerously angry Hork-Bajir
warrior and throw him twenty feet.
I'd seen her do it.
Tobias, you could at least have waited till he was done broadcasting that commercial.
Thousands of people saw that on TV! Thousands!
Most people will figure it was some kind of a stunt or a trick, I said.
Most people, maybe. But not Controllers. Any Controllers who happened to be watching
will guess right away that we were not just animals.
Controllers. There's a word you need to know. A Controller is anyone with a Yeerk in his
head. Yeerks are alien parasites. They are evil little slugs who live in the bodies of other
species and enslave them. All the Hork-Bajir are Controllers. So are the Taxxons.
So are more and more humans. Human-Controllers.
As I watched, Rachel began to shrink. The ropy tail was sucked up like a piece of spaghetti.
Her trunk grew smaller.
Blond hair began to sprout from her massive gray forehead. Her eyes wandered across her
face toward the middle. The vast leathery ears became pink and small and perfectly formed.
The others are going to ream us out big time, aren't they? I said.
Oh, yes. I think we can count on that.
It was my idea. I'll take the blame.
6
Oh, shut up, Tobias. Stop being all noble. Besides, it was amazing fun stomping those
cars!
She was small enough now that she could stand on her hind legs. As she did, her front legs
grew smooth and human. Her back legs lost their clunkiness and became her own long,
coltish legs.
Her morphing clothes, a skintight black leotard, emerged.
The tusks shlooped back into her mouth and divided into sparkling teeth. She was a very
pretty girl, beautiful even, except that she still had a two-foot-long gray nose.
At last the trunk seemed to roll up and became a regular nose.
She was a girl again. Barefoot, because no one had figured out how to morph shoes. Her
mouth was back to normal. She spoke in her normal voice, no longer in my head. Thoughtspeech
is only for morphs.
"Okay, I'm back. Let's bail!"
The siren sounds were coming ever closer. Head for the convenience store. I'll go up and
look around.
"I hope they have some flip-flops for sale in there," Rachel grumbled. "This shoe situation is
a pain."
The elephant was gone. The girl had emerged.
See? I told you it would be hard to believe.
It began at a deserted construction site, when we found the crashed spaceship of an Andalite
prince. He was the last surviving Andalite in our solar system. He and his fellow Andalites
had fought a great battle to drive away the Yeerk mother ship.
They fought and lost.
And now the Yeerks are among us. And they are now trying to enslave the human race.
Before he died at the hands of the Yeerk leader, a terrible creature called Visser Three, the
Andalite gave us a great gift - and a great curse.
The gift was the power to morph. To absorb the DNA of any living animal and to become
that animal. Never before had anyone but the Andalites themselves been given the power to
morph.
It meant a life of secrets. Of terrible danger.
The Yeerks think we are a small band of escaped Andalites. They know that morphs had
attacked their Yeerk pool. They know that morphs had even infiltrated the home of one of
their most important Controllers - Chapman.
But they don't know that we are just five normal human kids who'd been walking home from
the mall one night.
7
Visser Three wants us caught or dead. Visser Three usually gets what he wants.
But I was glad to fight the Yeerks. Maybe I just had less to lose than the others. Or maybe
something about the lonely, defeated, yet courageous Andalite prince touched me so deeply
that I could never regret fighting to settle the score.
But there has been a price to pay. You see, there is a limit on the power to morph. You must
never remain in a morph for more than two hours. If you do, you are trapped.
Forever.
And that is the curse of the Andalite's gift.
That is why, when Rachel returned to her human body, I didn't.
It would take Rachel a while to get home on the bus. I traveled a little faster. So I had time to
waste.
The sun was setting, and in my mind I could still picture the freed hawk heading into the sun.
I hoped she had found a nice patch of forest to spend the night. That's what a red-tail likes: a
nice tree branch with a clear view of a meadow full of little mice and rats and shrews and
voles as they scurry below. That's how we... they... hunt.
I headed toward the tall buildings of downtown. I caught a beautiful thermal that billowed up
the face of some skyscrapers. A thermal is like a big bubble of warm air. It rises beneath your
wings and makes it effortless to just go soaring up and up.
I caught the thermal and went shooting up the side of the skyscraper like I was riding an
elevator.
A lot of the offices were empty, since it was Saturday. But around the sixtieth floor I saw an
old man looking out the window. Maybe he was some big, important businessman, I don't
know.
But when he saw me he smiled. He watched me soar up and away. And I knew he was
jealous.
I was half a mile up when I finally turned away from the sun and headed toward Rachel's
house.
The sun was going down. The moon just peeked over the rim of the world.
Then, I felt... I don't know how to describe it. It was in the air above me. Huge. Vast!
Bigger than any jet.
I looked up. But there was nothing there.
And yet, I felt it in my heart. I knew it was up there. Coming toward me, but perhaps a mile
higher than me.
I focused all the power of my hawk's eyes on the sky.
A ripple!
8
That's what it was. A ripple. Like the ripple you make throwing a stone into a calm pond. The
faint twilight stars flickered as it passed by. The sun's light bent. And for Just a split second I
was sure I could see... something.
But no. No. It was gone.
If it had ever really been there.
I tried to follow the hole in the sky, but it was moving too fast. I tried to see which way it was
going. And where it had come from. It seemed to be moving away from the mountains and
picking up speed.
But I lost it over the suburbs as it accelerated away.
I flew on to Rachel's house. I watched as she got off the bus far below me. The others, Jake,
Marco, and Cassie, were all up in her room, waiting for us. I was not surprised.
Hey, Rachel, I said, floating above her.
She could only wave up at me. You can "hear" thought-speak when you're human, but you
can't make thought-speech.
I predict Marco's first words will be "Are you insane?" I told Rachel.
She gave me a little wink.
Rachel went in through the front door. I flew in an open window. There we were, all together,
the five of us: the Animorphs.
The other three of us must have seen the commercial and were not at all happy. -
Marco started the conversation.
"Are you INSANE?!!" he said.
9
CHAPTER 3
Marco yelled for a while. Jake made us promise never to do something that stupid again. And
Cassie, being Cassie, got everyone to make up and be friends again.
"We aren't supposed to be rescuing animals," Marco said. "We're supposed to be rescuing the
entire human race from being enslaved by the Yeerks."
I thought you didn't want to save the world, Marco, I pointed out.
He scowled at me. But there's no point in scowling at me. With my face I can out-scowl
anyone.
"You're right," Marco said. "But since all of you guys think you have to save the world, and
since you're all my friends, more or less, I figure someone has to keep you from being total
idiots."
Marco is the most reluctant of the Animorphs. Although actually he's the one who came up
with the word "Animorph." And he's been in with us from the start. Marco just thinks we
should look out for ourselves and our own families.
Marco and I will probably never be very close. He's a typical smart-aleck kind of guy.
Always confident. Always has some funny or sarcastic thing to say. He's short, or at least he's
not very tall. I guess girls think he's cute because he has this long brown hair and dark eyes.
Jake grinned at Marco. "So you're the one who has to rescue all of us from being idiots?"
"Boy, if Marco's the sensible one, we're all in serious trouble," Rachel said.
Everyone laughed.
Jake gave Marco an affectionate punch in the shoulder. "Just the same, it's nice of you to
want to save us all. It's almost sweet"
Marco made a face and grabbed one of Rachel's pillows to throw at Jake.
Marco and Jake are absolute opposites, although they've been buds forever. Jake is big. Not
football-player big, but solid. Jake is one of those people who are natural leaders. If you were
ever trapped in a burning building, you would turn to Jake and ask, "What do we do?" And
he would have an answer, too.
You can tell he and Rachel are cousins. They're both kind of determined people.
"I have to get going," Cassie said. "I have horses to feed and birdcages to clean."
"Don't say the word 'cage' around Tobias," Marco said. "He'll do some guerrilla-commandoNinja-SWAT-team-hawk-from-hell
attack on the Center. And he'll talk Rachel into stomping
your house flat."
Everyone laughed, because we all knew why Cassie had birdcages. Her father and mother are
both veterinarians. Her mom works for The Gardens, which is this huge zoo and amusement
park.
10
Her dad runs the Wildlife Rehabilitation Center in the barn on their family farm. The Center
takes in wild animals that are sick or hurt and cares for them.
The cages Cassie had to get home to clean were filled with sparrows with broken wings and
eagles who'd been shot and seagulls who'd gotten tangled in trash.
Cassie is our expert on animals. She also gets us access to animals to morph. She's a gentle
person. She can also morph better than any of us.
Everyone stood up and started to go.
"You coming, Tobias?" Jake asked me.
No, not right away. I think I'll fly around. It's a nice night
"Cool," he said. "I'll put some food up in your attic for you in case you get home late. I don't
want anything getting at it, though. Can you open one of those Rubbermaid things?"
I saw the way the others kind of looked away when Jake mentioned the attic. They feel sorry
for me.
I can get it open, I said. Just be careful. You know - Tom.
Tom is Jake's big brother. Tom is one of them.
Everyone said good night. I saw Cassie and Jake touch their hands together in a way that
could almost have been accidental. Then they were all gone. All but me and Rachel.
"I don't like thinking of you living in a cold attic," Rachel said.
I'm okay, I said. I wondered if I should tell her what I had seen, the darkness within
darkness, the hole in the sky. But the truth was, even I didn't know what it was.
It would just worry her. And she worried about me too much.
Good night, I said.
"Yeah. Take care of yourself, Tobias."
I flew out through her window into the night. Rachel's sad eyes seemed to follow me. I hated
the way they all felt sorry for me. All they could see was that I was not what I used to be. All
they saw was that I had no home.
But they didn't really understand. I hadn't had a real home since my parents died. I was used
to being alone. ' And I had the sky.
11
Chapter 4
The next day I decided to go back to where I had seen - or not seen - the big thing in the sky.
I had a feeling about it. A bad feeling.
I flew up over the same area, rising as high as I could on the thermals.
Hawks are not quite as good at soaring as eagles or some buzzards are. (Man, you should see
the way a turkey buzzard can work those thermals! Awesome.) And actually, the red-tail
hawk in my head would be just as happy perched patiently on the branch of a tree, waiting to
see its next meal go scurrying past.
But I didn't eat like a hawk. I ate food that Jake gave me. I didn't hunt. Although sometimes
the urge to hunt was pretty strong.
I could just hear Marco making some smart crack about me eating mice. Or roadkill.
When you're in a morph, it's hard to resist the animal's instincts. Jake found that out when he
became a lizard. He glomped down a live spider before he got control of the lizard's instincts.
I hadn't done that. Yet. I was afraid if I did it once, I'd never be able to stop.
I soared high above the city, over the area I'd been through the day before. But nothing.
Nothing moved in the air above me.
Then it occurred to me: Whatever it was, maybe it only happened at certain times of day. It
had been almost sunset when I'd felt its presence last.
I decided to come back around sunset. Which meant I had the whole day ahead of me with
nothing special to do. This did not make me happy. See, the fact is, a hawk spends almost all
its time hunting food.
As for me, Tobias, when I hadn't been in school, I used to spend most of my free time
watching TV, hanging out at the mall, doing homework, reading... all things it was difficult
for me to do, now.
I missed school. Even though I had constantly been picked on by bullies. I didn't really miss
my home, though. See, when my parents died, there was no one who really wanted me. I
ended up getting shunted back and forth between an uncle here and an aunt across the
country.
Neither of them really cared about me. I don't think they even missed me. I had arranged for
Jake to leave a message with my uncle. We told him I had gone to stay with my aunt. Each of
them, my uncle and my aunt, thought I was staying with the other.
I had no idea how long that trick would hold up before one of them figured out I wasn't in
either place.
I guess when they realize it they'll call the cops and report me as a runaway. Or maybe they
won't even bother.
12
So. What was I going to do with my day? I'd been floating up here in the high air, just below
the clouds, for a couple of hours. It was time to give it up and try again another time.
I tilted my wings and adjusted my tail, turning toward Rachel's house. Maybe she would be
hanging around the house, bored.
Then it happened.
A mile or more above me, the ripple passed through the air. An emptiness, a hole where no
hole could be.
I reacted instantly. I had to get closer.
I flapped till my chest and shoulders were sore. But it was moving too fast, and it was too
high.
It pulled away from me, a wave of air, a rippling of the fabric of the sky. It was moving in a
different direction, though. It was moving toward the mountains.
Then... a flight of geese on the move in a tight V-formation.
There were maybe a dozen of the big, determined geese, moving along at an amazing rate,
powering their way through the air like they always do. Geese always seem to be on a
mission. Like, "Get out of our way, we're geese and we're coming through."
The geese were aimed straight for the disturbance.
Suddenly, the lead goose folded like it had been hit by a truck. Its wings collapsed. But it did
not fall.
The crippled goose slid through the air. It slid horizontally, rolling and flopping like it was
passing over the top of a racing train.
Most of the other geese suffered the same fate. One or two peeled away in time, but geese are
not real agile.
The invisible wave smacked into the flight, and the geese were crushed. They were rolling
and sliding along some unseen but solid surface.
And everywhere the geese hit, I could catch little glimpses of steel-gray metal.
The wave passed by. The geese fell in its wake, dead or crippled.
It flew on, unconcerned. But then, why should the Yeerks care about a handful of geese?
And that's what they were, I was certain. Yeerks.
What I had seen, or not quite seen, was a Yeerk ship.
13
CHAPTER 5
"It figures," Marco said thoughtfully. "The Yeerks would have to have some kind of cloaking
ability. Like 'stealth' technology, only much better."
We are all in Cassie's barn. Her dad was away for the afternoon. And it's one of the few
places where I can go and not look out of place. "
It's a regular old-fashioned barn, but with rows of clean cages and fluorescent lights. There
are partitions keeping the birds away from the horses, and more partitions keeping the
raccoons and opossums and the occasional coyote away from the skittish horses. The floor of
the barn is usually strewn with hoses and buckets and scattered hay. There are charts on each
cage showing the condition of the animal and what treatment it's getting.
It's usually a pretty noisy place, what with various birds chirping or cooing, horses snuffling,
and raccoons fussing with their food.
I looked over a little nervously at a pair of wolves, one male, one female. One had been shot.
The other had eaten poison left out by a farmer. Wolves were new in the area. Wildlife
experts had brought some back to the nearby forest.
Wolves make hawks a little edgy.
"We were always able to see Yeerk ships," Rachel pointed out. "We saw the Bug fighters and
the Blade ship." She was leaning against a cage that housed an injured mourning dove. The
dove was watching me suspiciously.
"Yeah, but every Yeerk ship we've ever dealt with has been either on the ground or about to
land," Jake said. "Maybe the cloaking ability doesn't work when they get close to land. But if
you think about it, Marco is right. They would have to be able to avoid being picked up by
radar. Maybe they also have the ability to avoid being seen."
It was a Yeerk ship, I said flatly.
"How can you be so sure?" Cassie asked. She was working as we talked, cleaning an empty
cage with a brush and a bucket of sudsy water.
It just was, I said stubbornly. I... I just got this feeling from it. Also, it seemed huge.
Far bigger than even the biggest jet. This was huge. More like a real ship, you know, like an
ocean liner.
"The question is, what do we do about it?" Jake asked. Of course, I knew he'd already made
up his mind to do something. But Jake doesn't like to act like the one in charge, even though
that's how I think of him. He lets everyone have their say first.
I want to find out what it's doing, I said. The first time, I had the feeling it was heading
away from the mountains. The second time, it was doing just the opposite. It was flying too
low to make it over the mountains. So I'm guessing it was doing something in the
mountains.
Rachel nodded. "That makes sense."
14
Marco rolled his eyes. "The mountains? Have you suburb-dwellers ever been to the
mountains? We're talking about a large area. No matter how big this ship is, it could hide in a
thousand places in the mountains."
"Then we'd better start looking right away," Rachel said brightly.
Jake looked at Cassie. "Cass? What do you think?"
Cassie shrugged. "I halfway feel like we've done enough. You know? We attacked the Yeerk
pool. We barely got out alive. We infiltrated Chapman's house and Rachel was captured.
Again, we barely got out alive. I guess the question is, how many risks are we going to take?
How many more times are we going to barely escape?"
I could see that Marco was surprised. Suddenly it sounded like Cassie was on his side.
"Exactly! Exactly! Just what I've been saying. Why is it our job to get killed?"
But then Cassie went and blew it all for him.
"I mean, as far as I'm concerned, I can't just do nothing while people are enslaved by the
Yeerks." Cassie said. "Maybe it's just me..." She shrugged. "The thing is, I have these
powers."
She shrugged again. "I can't just do nothing."
"Look, these aren't people we know," Marco argued. "They aren't my friends. Or my family."
He shot a guilty look at Jake. "And we did everything we could for Tom. So why should I get
killed for strangers? We can't stay lucky forever. Don't you people understand that? Sooner or
later, we'll slip up. Sooner or later we'll be standing around here crying because Jake or
Rachel or Cassie or Tobias is gone."
"You know something?" Rachel exploded. "I'm tired of trying to talk you into this, Marco.
You want out? Fine, you're OUT!"
"Hey, Rachel, you're not just doing this to help save the human race," Marco yelled back.
"You get off on the danger. That's why you went with Tobias to free that bird. That wasn't
about saving the world. That was about rescuing some stupid bird."
Marco realized he'd gone too far. He fell silent. The others all looked guiltily at me. Rachel
shot Marco a look of pure anger.
As of right now, I said, as of today, only one of us has been hurt. Me. But I'm not going
to give up. I'm not anyone's leader. But what I am going to do is go to the mountains
tomorrow morning. What the rest of you do is your business.
"I'll be with you," Rachel said instantly.
Cassie nodded.
Jake made a wry smile. "You say you're not a leader, but I'll go with you."
Marco shook his head. "No," he said.
15
"Your choice," Rachel said.
"That's not what I meant," Marco said angrily. "I meant no, not in the morning. Tomorrow's a
school day. If all of us skip school on the same day and later there's some trouble with the
Yeerks, don't you think Chapman might put two and two together?"
Jake raised an eyebrow. "Marco's right. After school." He looked at the others and nodded.
It bothered me that Marco was right. But he was. Marco might be a pain in the butt. But he's
a very smart guy.
It worried me a little. It made me wonder. Was he right about other things as well?
How many risks could we take before we lost? How long till the five of us were four? Or
two?
Or none?
16
CHAPTER 6
Jake had a peregrine falcon morph we'd used before. Marco and Cassie had morphed ospreys.
Rachel had been a bald eagle. So we all should have been able to fly up to the mountains.
But there are millions of bird-watchers in this country. They're very cool people because they
never hurt a bird. They don't hunt. They just get pleasure out of watching birds fly or nest.
Bird-watchers would think it was very, very weird if they saw a red-tail hawk, a bald eagle, a
falcon, and two ospreys all flying together as if they were on a mission.
And some of those gentle bird-watchers might be not-so-gentle Controllers.
"Bird-watchers!" Marco snorted as he tramped over the carpet of pine needles deeper into the
woods. "We could fly, but no. No, we have to walk. Twenty miles, probably!"
Cassie's farm has a lot of open grass areas, and it borders on a national forest. The national
forest goes on forever. It stretches from the edge of town all the way up into the mountains.
It's all pines and oaks and elms and birches. Wilderness, really. Thousands of square acres of
it.
"Oh, come on, Marco," Cassie chided gently. "It's an opportunity to try out a new morph!"
"Yeah," Jake chided. "Instead of being home doing math homework, you get to turn into a
wolf. Are you going to tell me you'd rather be doing equations?"
"Let's see," Marco considered. "Math? Or becoming a wolf and going off to find aliens?
Maybe I should ask the school counselor what she thinks.' It's such a common problem. I'm
sure she'd have some good advice."
Since it wasn't a good idea for us all to travel to the mountains as birds, the others needed a
morph that could travel far and fast through woods. And there were the two injured wolves in
Cassie's barn...
Jake stopped, looked around, and announced, "This is good." We were a few hundred yards
into the woods. I came to rest on a low branch of a huge oak tree. The hawk in me took note
of a squirrel a few branches up. He started chittering and shrieking his little squirrel warning:
Danger! Danger!
Hawk! Hawk!
I gave him a look. He twitched, stuck the acorn he was holding into his cheek, and took off at
full speed.
"What I don't get is why I have to be a girl wolf," Marco grumbled.
"We had one male and one female," Cassie explained for the tenth time. "If two of us
morphed into the male, we'd have two males. Two male wolves might decide they had to
fight for dominance."
"I could control it," Marco said.
"Marco, you and Jake already fight for dominance, and you're just ordinary guys," Rachel
pointed out.
17
"She's right," Cassie said sadly. "I'm afraid your primitive male behavior might slow us
down."
"Hey, when I morphed into a gorilla, I handled that gorilla brain okay, didn't I?" Marco
demanded.
"Sure, Marco," Rachel said. She batted her eyes. "But that was different. You and the gorilla
were already so much alike."
Cassie and Rachel gave each other discreet high-fives.
"Hugely funny," Marco said.
"We flipped a coin, fair and square," Jake said. "I got to be the male. You're one of the
females. Get over it."
"Let me see that coin again," Marco said suspiciously.
Jake just smiled. "Let's just do this. Cassie, you want to go first, to see what it's like?"
We had learned from hard experience that morphing can be extremely disturbing. Jake had
morphed into a lizard and been almost overpowered by the animal's fearful brain. The same
had happened to Rachel when she'd morphed a shrew. She still had nightmares about the
shrew experience - its fear and, worse, its hunger for bugs and rotting flesh.
On the other hand, Jake had morphed into a flea, and according to him it was kind of a big
nothing. Like being trapped inside a very old, very bad video game where you could barely
see anything. The flea brain had been too simple to make trouble.
"Okay. I'll let you know." Cassie closed her eyes and concentrated. Then she opened them
again. "Wait. Let me get down to my morph suit first. I don't want to get tangled up in my
clothes."
She removed everything but a leotard, kicked off her shoes, and stood barefoot on the pine
needles.
The first change was her hair. It went from very short black to shaggy silver in just a few
seconds. It traveled down from her head, down her neck, over her shoulders, around her neck.
Long, shaggy fur.
Then her nose bulged out.
I shuddered. You never really get used to seeing people morph. It is something straight out of
a nightmare. Even though Cassie seems to have some kind of talent for it. She's never quite
as gross as the others. I guess it's because she's so close to so many animals. Maybe she just
has a special feel for them.
Still, as the wolf snout began to push out from her face, it was not a pleasant sight.
Her ears grew furry and pointed. Then they slid straight up the side of her head till they
almost touched on top.
18
Her eyes went from brown-black to golden brown.
All over her body, the fur replaced the bright pinks and greens of her leotard. A tail suddenly
shot out from behind. I could hear the grinding of her bones as they rearranged. Her upper
arms shortened. Her lower arms grew longer. Fingers shriveled and disappeared, leaving
behind only stubby black nails,
There was a sickening crunch as her knees changed direction. Her legs shrank and thinned
and grew fur.
Suddenly she fell forward, no longer able to stand erect.
It had taken about two minutes.
Cassie was now a wolf.
"How is it?" Jake asked.
Cassie jerked suddenly at the sound of his voice and spun around to face him. She bared her
teeth and snarled a warning that would have made a Taxxon back up.
She had very impressive teeth.
"Let's all stand really still," Jake said.
"Good idea," Marco agreed. "Really, really still. Because those are really, really big teeth."
Everyone stood motionless. They had all been through similar experiences. We knew what
was happening. Inside the wolf's head, Cassie was fighting to gain control of the wolf's wild
instincts.
Sorry, she thought-spoke at last. I have it now.
"Are you sure?" Rachel asked warily.
Yes, it's fine. I'm fine. In fact... it's really kind of wonderful! The sense of hearing. Wow!
And my nose. Whoa, that's incredible. I've never morphed an animal with such a strong sense
of smell.
"Then I'm extra glad I put on deodorant," Marco joked.
Who had bacon for breakfast? Cassie turned her wolf head this way and that. Rachel?
Bacon? I thought you were going to go vegetarian!
Marco laughed at the guilty look on Rachel's face. "Oooh, busted by Cassie the wonder-nose.
"
"Let's get busy," Jake said. "The two-hour clock is now running. Tick-tock."
One by one they each stole a glance at me. I'm the handy reminder of what happens if you
stay in a morph for too long.
19
20
CHAPTER 7
I was jealous.
I mean, okay, if you ever have to be stuck as an animal, I think being a hawk is the coolest
choice of all.
But still, I was jealous. My friends were really enjoying being wolves. I guess it was a
strange experience for them.
I flew above the forest, skimming the treetops, while down below they ran. They moved so
fast it wasn't always easy for me to keep up. Not that their actual speed was so great. It's just
that they never stopped. Never rested. They just moved at a constant twenty miles an hour or
so. Over fallen logs. Between trees. Under bushes. Nothing even slowed them down.
Well, actually, that's not completely true. Two things slowed them down a little.
One was Jake. He was the dominant male. In wolf packs that's called an "alpha." So he had a
special wolf job to perform.
Jake, just how many more times are you going to pee? Rachel demanded after his fifth
stop.
I... I don't know. I kind of have to do it a lot, he admitted.
Why? Did you drink too much soda before we left?
I don't know, he admitted. I just keep getting this urge to pee.
You're scent marking, Cassie explained. You're marking out a territory.
I am?
Yes, you are. It's normal. For a dominant wolf. At least that's what my wolf book said.
Although it's a little gross for the rest of us to have to watch.
The other thing that slowed them down was when they stopped once and started to howl. It
was Jake who started it. It caught everyone by surprise. Including Jake himself.
"OWWW-OOOOOOO-yow-yow-OOOOOO. "
What the -  Marco started to say, but then he was doing it, too.
"Yow-yow-OOWWOOOOO!"
Cassie and Rachel weren't far behind.
"OOOOO-yowww-OWW-OOOOOOO!"
I heard the yowling, of course, so I took a quick turn around a tree and headed back to them.
What are you people doing? I demanded. We're in a hurry here. You guys can only stay
in morph for two hours. Why are you wasting time howling?
21
I don't know, Jake admitted sheepishly. I just suddenly felt like it would be a good idea.
Once he started I... I kind of felt like I should join in, Rachel said.
I think it's a way to warn all the other wolves that we're here, so we don't run into any other
packs and get in fights, Cassie suggested. Which sounded perfectly reasonable. Until you
saw that "Cassie" had her head tilted back and her snout pointed at the sky and was yodeling
like an idiot.
I flapped my wings and broke out from under the trees. The city and the suburbs were far
behind me now. We had traveled pretty far in an hour's time. It was about the same time of
day as my second sighting of the invisible ship. The time when it had been heading toward
the mountains.
I swooped back down into the trees. You guys keep moving. I'm going up top to look
around.
Be careful, Rachel said.
I banked left around a tree, then flapped my way back up into the sun. I climbed hard and
fast, using a lot of energy. The exercise helped distract me. It's hard feeling sorry for yourself
when you're working out big time.
After a while I was able to catch a nice thermal and get some easy altitude. I could still see
the little wolf pack, moving like it had a single mind, flowing around the trees, swift and
sure.
I tried to imagine what it must be like to be a wolf. The amazing sense of smell. The
incredible hearing. All that confident power, those ripping teeth, the cool intelligence.
Maybe later I would ask Jake or Rachel about it.
Then you could ask them what it was like to be human. Maybe they can tell me about that,
too, I thought bitterly.
Stop it, Tobias, I ordered myself. Stop it.
I guess I felt that if I ever started to feel really sorry for myself, I might never stop.
I kept a sharp eye out on the sky above, but it was probably still too early for the ship to
come. If it even came. There was no reason to think it kept some kind of schedule.
Then, down below, I saw something that caught my attention. There was a convoy of trucks
and Jeeps moving along a narrow, snaking dirt road. Maybe five vehicles. They had the
markings of the Park Service. But they seemed to be in a big hurry.
They drove to a lake that I had just glimpsed up ahead. By the shore of the lake, they pulled
off the road. Then, to my surprise, several dozen uniformed men jumped from the trucks and
began to fan out through the woods.
They were carrying guns. But not rifles or even pistols. I could see them clearly. They were
carrying automatic weapons.
22
Suddenly, movement in the sky! What the -
To my left I spotted a pair of helicopters. They zipped just inches above the trees. They
began to circle the lake. These also had Park Service markings.
This is all wrong, I told myself. These guys don't act or move like Park Rangers. These guys
move like an army.
And as I watched, half a dozen of the armed men surrounded a small patch of bright yellow.
It was a tent.
Two people - they looked like college types - were cooking over a little fire outside the tent.
I could see the expressions of total amazement and fear when they suddenly realized they
were surrounded by six men with automatic weapons.
The two campers were marched back to the nearest truck and driven away at high speed.
I don't know what story the two campers were told. Maybe the Park Rangers told them there
was a dangerous fugitive in the area. Or maybe they said there was a forest fire. I don't know.
I just know those two campers were out of there before they knew what hit them.
The two choppers circled the lake. Then they landed in a small clearing at the far side of the
lake at the same time.
It was more than a mile away. Far, even for my hawk's eyes, in the slanting light of
afternoon. But I could still see what came out of those helicopters.
Out they leaped, one after another.
Seven feet tall. The most dangerous-looking creatures you'll ever want to see. Foot-long,
razor-sharp blades raked forward from their snake heads. More blades at their elbows, wrists,
and knees. Feet like Tyrannosaurus rex.
The shock troops of the Yeerks.
Hork-Bajir warriors.
23
CHAPTER 8
Hork-Bajir!
The first time I'd seen them was at the construction site. I was still fully human then. It was
while Visser Three was taunting the fallen Andalite. The five of us had been cowering behind
a low wall. A Hork-Bajir had been within a few feet of us.
The Andalite told us they had once been a good people, the Hork-Bajir. That despite their
fearsome appearance, they were a gentle race.
But the Hork-Bajir were all Controllers now. They all carried the Yeerk slug in their brains.
And they were no longer gentle.
I made a sharp turn back. I had to warn the others. I passed over a group of the Park Rangers,
and swooped low enough to read one man's watch. My friends had been in morph for more
than an hour.
Great. Low on time, and the Hork-Bajir are here.
I soon spotted the wolf pack, still trotting along resolutely, never tiring. Pausing only for Jake
to pee.
I dived toward them. Just over their heads I pulled up suddenly.
"Yowl! Yip! Rrawr!"
They yelped and scampered around. Jake bared his fangs at me.
I came to rest on a decayed log.
Instantly, as if on command, the others started fanning out around me, encircling me. The
five of them were acting like a wolf pack surrounding prey. In their own way they kind of
reminded me of Hork-Bajir.
Hey, it's just me, relax, I said.
No answer. Jake snarled a brief command at one of the others.
Wait a minute. Five? Five wolves?
Jake, who wasn't really Jake, leaped at me.
Whoa!
Wolves don't usually hurt humans, but they will definitely eat a bird when they're hungry
enough. And one thing you don't ever want to see is a hungry wolf, yellowed fangs bared,
gold-brown eyes glaring, fur bristling, coming at you.
I flapped my wings hard.
The big male wolf went shooting past. Barely. But the rest were all around me!
24
I flapped again and got airborne, but just a few inches. I was skimming wildly over the pineneedle
carpet, flapping for all I was worth, with five determined wolves hot on my tail.
SWOOOOM! I caught the tiniest headwind, but it was all I needed.
I was up! Up and out of there, while the wolves yowled and snapped their powerful jaws in
frustration below me.
Ten minutes later I found a second wolf pack. This time I counted. Four wolves.
Still, I was cautious. Is that you guys?
Who else would it be? Marco asked.
Don't ask, I said. Look, we have trouble. I flapped down to a low branch and rested my
wings. I was still a little shaken up from my close call with the wrong wolves.
There's a lake just a little way ahead. It's crawling with Park Rangers who aren't really Park
Rangers.
Yeah, I thought I smelled water. And humans, Cassie said.
How do you know they aren't real Park Rangers? Jake asked.
Because real Park Rangers don't carry machine guns, I said. Plus, they don't hang around
with Hork-Bajir.
Hork-Bajir? Cassie asked shakily. You're sure?
Oh yeah, I said. It's kind of hard to confuse them with anything else. The Park Rangers
are clearing out the area around the lake. They hustled some campers out of there real fast. At
gunpoint.
Hork-Bajir, Marco said with distaste. I really don't like those guys.
Rachel asked, This lake, it's in the same direction your big invisible ship was moving?
It's in a perfectly straight line, I said. Whatever that ship was, I'd bet anything it was
heading for that lake.
And judging by the way you say these Park-Ranger Controllers and Hork-Bajir are acting,
it's on its way again, Marco said thoughtfully.
I'll tell you one thing, I said. These guys all looked like they'd done this many times
before. You know what I mean? Like this was a real common routine. They had it down.
We don't have a lot of time left in morph, Jake said. But it would be a shame to miss the
chance to find out what this is all about.
I say go for it, Rachel said.
25
You always say go for it, Marco muttered. If just once you would say, 'Hey, let's not do
this,' it would make me so happy.
You have about forty minutes left, I told them. The lake is about five minutes away.
Okay. Let's go. But in and out fast, Jake warned. Just enough to see what's going on.
They took off, with Jake in the lead. Remember, just act like wolves.
Yeah, so if anyone sees the Three Little Pigs, don't forget to huff and puff, Marco said.
I went airborne again, but this time I stayed close by.
Park Rangers just ahead, I said.
Yeah, I can definitely smell them now, Rachel replied. And hear them, too.
Okay, look, wolves would try to steer clear of humans, Cassie advised. So a little
slinking would be perfectly normal.
They moved in a cautious circle around the phony Park Rangers. But I could see that the
Rangers had spotted them. They tensed up, then relaxed when they saw it was just a wolf
pack minding its own business.
I decided to get some altitude. Unfortunately, since there were no convenient thermals, I had
to flap my way up. I was a few thousand yards high, able to see my friends and the lake,
when I felt its presence again.
I looked up.
The invisible wave. The slight ripple in the fabric of the sky. It was there. It was moving
slowly overhead. Even more slowly than before.
And then, as I watched, it was invisible no more.
26
CHAPTER 9
Don't act suspicious or freak, I called down to the others. But look up.
Oh my God, Rachel gasped.
It's... it's huge! Cassie cried.
It was huge. But the word huge doesn't really begin to describe it.
Have you ever seen a picture of an oil tanker? Or maybe an aircraft carrier? That's what I
mean by huge. Compared to this thing, the biggest jumbo jet ever built was a toy.
It was shaped like a manta ray. There was a bulging, fat portion in the middle, with swooped,
curvy wings, one either side. On top of the wings were huge scoops, like air intakes on a
fighter jet, but much bigger. You could suck a fleet of buses in through those scoops.
The only windows were in a small bulge at the top. The bridge, I realized. Focusing on it, I
could see the shadowy shapes of Taxxons inside.
But mostly that ship was just big. Really big. As in, it blocked out the sun, it was so big.
Suddenly, out from behind the ship, a pair of Bug fighters zipped into view. We had seen
them before. They are small, for spaceships. You couldn't park one in your garage, but you
could land it on your front lawn. They look like metal cockroaches with two serrated
spearlike protrusions pointed forward on either side.
I have Bug fighters up here, I called down to the others, A pair.
Who cares about Bug fighters? Marco asked. They're nothing compared to that... that
whale!
The Bug fighters are circling the lake. I guess they're looking around for troubles
Try not to look like trouble, Jake advised dryly.
I did my best to look like a normal, harmless hawk. Doing normal hawk things. But the main
ship was unbelievably intimidating. I mean, nothing that big should be floating in the air.
Suddenly one of the Bug fighters went shooting right past me, low and slow. I could see in
the window. Inside was the usual crew: one Hork-Bajir and one Taxxon.
The Taxxons are the second most common type of Controller. Imagine a very big centipede.
Now imagine it even bigger, twice as long as a man. So big around, you couldn't get your
arms around it if you wanted to give it a hug.
Not that you'd ever want to give it a hug. Taxxons are gross, disgusting creatures. Unlike the
Hork-Bajir, who were enslaved against their will, Taxxons chose to turn their minds over to
the Yeerk parasites. They are allies of the Yeerks. I don't know why, and I probably don't
want to.
The Bug fighter shot past, not interested in me.
27
The huge main ship sank slowly down toward the surface of the lake. Are you guys seeing
this? It looks like it's going to land on the lake.
Are we seeing it? No. We've totally missed the fact that a spaceship the size of Delaware is
hovering in midair.
Marco, of course.
It's incredible, Rachel said. Incredible.
You know, I hate to be a pessimist, Marco said, but when I look at that thing I get a bad
feeling about our chances. Four hounds and a bird versus a ship the size of ldaho!
A minute ago it was just the size of Delaware, Cassie pointed out mildly.
What's it doing here? That's what I want to know, Jake said.
They had reached the shore of the lake and were prowling along, looking like wolves should
look. But they were also glancing regularly up at the massive ship. I worried a little that some
Controller, human or Hork-Bajir, would notice that they were paying a little too much
attention.
You guys? Watch how you act. The Yeerks will be looking for any animals that act
strangely, I said. They're on the lookout for Andalites who can morph.
He's right, Marco agreed. Jake? Start peeing on things again.
Very funny, Jake said.
Then something began to happen. Hey. Look!
From the belly of the ship, a pipe began to lower into the water. Then a second pipe, and a
third.
They're like straws, Cassie said. They're drinking!
I could hear the sucking sound. Thousands, maybe millions of gallons of water being sucked
up into the ship.
That's why it's so big, Marco said. He laughed. Well, well, well. What do you know? We
have just discovered that the Yeerks have a great big weakness.
A weakness? Rachel demanded. You can look at that ship and talk about weakness?
But I understood what Marco meant. It means they need something, I said.
Exactly, Marco said. Those big scoops on the sides? I think those are for air. That's why
they fly so far through the atmosphere when they come down. They're scooping up oxygen.
And now they are sucking up water.
It's a truck! Cassie cried. That whole huge ship is really just a truck!
28
Yeah, I said. It carries air and water up to the Yeerk mother ship in orbit. I guess they
need Earth to supply them.
So. It's not like Star Trek, where they can just make their own air and water, Marco mused.
As long as they are up there in orbit, the Yeerks need the planet to supply them with air and
water. Well, well. I think that's the first hopeful sign yet.
We're running low on time, Cassie reminded everyone. Time to get out of here.
Okay, but everyone be cool about it, Jake advised. We act like we're just sauntering off to
go kill a moose - or whatever it is wolves saunter off to do.
They drifted back from the shore of the lake. I stayed behind. I no longer have a time limit to
worry about.
The Yeerk ship was creating a warm updraft, so I spread my wings-wide and rode it up. The
two Bug fighters were still circling low and slow. On the shore all around the lake, the bogus
Park Rangers and the few Hork-Bajir kept up their patrols.
Then I saw her.
I know to human eyes, every hawk looks pretty much alike. But I knew-right away it was her
- the hawk I had freed from the car dealer.
She, too, was riding the thermal, a thousand yards higher than me. Without even really
thinking about it, I adjusted the angle of my wings and soared up toward her.
She saw me, I was sure of that. Hawks don't miss much of what goes on around them. She
knew I was coming toward her, and she waited.
It wasn't like we were friends. Hawks don't know what "friend" means. And she certainly did
not feel any gratitude toward me for saving her from captivity. Hawks don't have that sort of
emotion, either. In fact, in her mind there may have been no connection between me and her
freedom.
Still, I soared up to her. I don't know why. I really don't. All we shared was the same outer
body. We both had wings. We both had talons. We both had feathers.
Suddenly I was afraid. I was afraid of her. And it was insane, because there I was, floating
above an alien spaceship so big it could have been turned into a mall.
But it was the hawk that frightened me.
Or maybe not the hawk herself. Maybe it was the feeling I had, rising up to meet her in the
sky.
The feeling of recognition. The feeling of going home. The feeling that I belonged with her.
It hit me in a wave of disgust and horror.
No. NO!
29
I was Tobias. A human. A human being, not a bird!
I banked sharply away from-her.
I was human. I was a boy named Tobias. A boy with blond hair that was always a mess. A
boy with human friends. Human interests.
But part of me kept saying, "It's a lie. It's a lie. You are the hawk. The hawk is you. Arid
Tobias is dead."
I plummeted toward the ground. I folded my wings back and welcomed the sheer speed.
Faster! Faster!
Then, with eyes that Tobias never had, I saw the wolf pack below. And I saw the danger
before them.
30
CHAPTER 10
My four friends stood stock still. They were staring with deadly focus at five other wolves.
The two packs had run into each other. Between them lay a dead rabbit. It was the other
pack's kill. My friends had stumbled into them. Now the two alpha males were locked in a
deadly dominance battle.
One of those alpha males was Jake.
The other was an actual wolf.
Jake had human intelligence on his side. But if it came to a fight, the other wolf had more
experience. He hadn't gotten to be the head wolf in his pack by losing fights.
I would have laughed if I could. It was ridiculous! But at least it took my mind off the female
hawk. Off the feeling that drew me to her, that called out to me, even while Yeerk ships
zipped in a deadly dance through the air.
Then it hit me with a shock: The time! They'd been low on time when they'd left the shore
and started back. How much time had elapsed?
I swooped down low. What are you guys doing? I demanded.
Shut up, Tobias, Jake snapped tersely. We're in actuation here.
Yeah, I can see that. Back away from them.
I can't. If I back off, I lose.
Lose what? I yelled. You're not a wolf. He's a wolf. Let him be boss wolf. You guys are
way low on time!
It's not that simple, Cassie said. If Jake looks weak, the other alpha may attack. We
screwed up. We're in their territory. And they think we're trying to steal their kill.
Suddenly the other big male snarled and took a step forward. Instantly Jake bared his teeth
still further and stood his ground.
The dead rabbit lay between them, only a few feet from the vicious teeth on either side.
This fight's over the rabbit, right? I said.
No answer. Everyone was so tense they were quivering. At any second this would explode
into all-out gang warfare of the wolf variety.
I knew what I should do. But it went against every instinct in the hawk's brain.
And Tobias the human wasn't exactly thrilled, either.
I flapped up to gain a little height. I would need the speed. Then I locked my eyes on that
rabbit and prayed that I was as fast as I thought I was.
31
Oh, maaaaaan!
Down I shot. My talons came forward.
"Tseeeeer!" I screamed.
Zoom!
A wolf on each side.
A dead rabbit.
Thwack! My talons hit the dead animal and snatched at the fur.
I flapped once, twice. The rabbit came off the ground.
The big wolf lunged. I could feel his teeth rake my tail.
I flapped for all I was worth, scooting along the ground, half-carrying, half-dragging the dead
rabbit, with the wolf racing just inches behind me.
Tobias! Rachel cried.
Get out of here! I yelled. I have to drop this thing. It's too heavy!
Fortunately, when he isn't being an idiot wolf, Jake is quick and decisive. Let's go while we
can!
I dropped the rabbit just as the wolf caught up to me.
SNAP!
Jaws that could kill a moose scissored the air a tenth of an inch from me. I'm telling you, he
was close enough for me to count his molars.
I felt the tiniest bit of a breeze. It was enough. I opened my wings and let the breeze lift me
up and away.
Oh, that was really not fun, I said.
Are you okay?
I think I lost some tail feathers, I said. Tail feathers grow back.
I caught up with the others. They were moving as fast as wolves can move. Time was running
short. I didn't know exactly how much time. It was one of the continuing problems of
morphing. Even if you could wear a watch, you wouldn't want to. A wolf or a hawk with a
watch looks slightly suspicious.
32
I'll see if I can get a time reading, I said. I was tired. Very tired, after the long flight here
and not one but two close calls involving wolves. The hawk in me just wanted to find a nice
branch with a view of an open field and take a rest. But I knew I couldn't.
I gained a little altitude, not too much. Just enough to spot one of the Park Service trucks.
The Controllers were off somewhere, but there was a clock in the dashboard.
I stared at the number in disbelief.
It had to be wrong! It had to be!
33
CHAPTER 11
I wasn't tired anymore.
At top speed, I raced back to my friends. I felt sick. I felt like my heart was going to burst.
They had missed the deadline! It was too late. Too late, and they would all be trapped. Like
me. Forever.
MORPH! I screamed as I closed in on them.
Thought-speak is like regular speech. It gets harder to hear the farther away you are.
Morph back! Now! Maybe the clock in the truck was off. Maybe five minutes one way or
the other wouldn't matter.
There! I saw them. Four wolves moving relentlessly toward the distant city.
Morph! Now! I screamed as I shot like a bullet over their heads.
How much time do we have?! Marco demanded.
None.
That got them going. I landed, exhausted, on a branch.
Cassie was the first to begin the change. Her fur grew short. Her snout flattened into a nose.
Long, human legs swelled and burst from the thin dog legs.
Her tail sucked back in and disappeared. She was already more than half human by the time
the first changes began to appear on the others.
Come on, hurry, I urged them.
What time is it? Jake demanded.
You have about two minutes, I said. It was a lie. According to the clock, they were already
seven minutes too late.
Too late.
And yet Cassie was continuing to emerge from her wolf body. Skin was replacing fur. Her
leotard covered her legs.
But the others were not so lucky.
Ahhhh! I heard Rachel cry in my mind. Her morph was going all wrong. Her human hands
appeared at the end of her wolf legs. But nothing else seemed to be changing.
I looked, horrified, at Marco. His normal head emerged with startling suddenness from his
wolf body. But the rest of him had not changed. He looked down at himself and cried out in
terror. "Helowl. Yipmeahhh!" It was an awful sound, half human, half wolf.
34
This was worse than I had feared. I figured they could be trapped as wolves, like I had been
trapped as a hawk. But they were emerging as half-human freaks of nature.
They were living nightmares.
Cassie ran from one to the next. "Come on, Jake, concentrate! Focus! Rachel, bear down,
girl. Picture yourself human. See yourself like you're looking in the mirror. Fight the fear,
Marco!"
I saw Marco roll his human eyes up and stare at me. His gaze locked on me. It was like he
hated me. Or feared me. Both, maybe.
I didn't move. If Marco needed me to concentrate, that was fine.
But it sent a shiver of disgust through me. I suddenly saw myself as they all must see me: as
something frightening. A freak. An accident. A sickening, pitiable creature.
Slowly, slowly, Marco began to emerge. Slowly, slowly, the human body appeared.
Rachel, too, and Jake. They were winning their battle.
"That's it, Jake," Cassie urged. She held his hand tight between both of hers. "Come back to
me, Jake. Come all the way back."
I watched Rachel. She still had a small, shrinking tail. Her mouth still protruded. Her blond
hair was still more like gray fur. But she was going to make it. The clock must have been
fast. A matter of five minutes one way or the other had determined their fates.
I was glad they had made it. They were all human again.
"We did it," Jake gasped weakly. He lay on his back on the pine needles. "We made it."
"That was close," Rachel said. "That was way too close. It was so hard. It was like trying to
climb up out of a pool of molasses."
"I'm human again," Marco muttered. "Human! Toes. Hands. Arms and shoulders." He
checked himself all over.
"Ha ha! That was close!" Cassie exulted. She gave Jake a hug. Then I guess she felt selfconscious,
because she ran over and hugged Rachel and Marco.
They were all laughing, all giggling with relief.
"We're okay," Jake sighed.
I was happy for them. Really I was. But suddenly I didn't want to be there.
Suddenly I desperately didn't want to be there. I felt an awful, gaping black hole open up all
around me. I was sick. Sick with the feeling of being trapped.
Trapped.
Forever!
35
I looked at my talons. They would never be feet again.
I looked at my wing. It would never be an arm. It would never again end in a hand. I would
never touch. I would never touch anything... anyone... again.
I dropped from the branch and opened my wings.
"Tobias!" Jake shouted after me.
But I couldn't stay. I flapped like a demon, no longer caring that I was tired. I had to fly. I had
to get away.
"Tobias, no! Come back!" Rachel cried.
I caught a blessed breeze and soared up and away, my own silent, voiceless scream echoing
in my head.
36
CHAPTER 12
It was late when I returned to what was now my home.
After I was first trapped in my hawk body, Jake had removed an outside panel that led into
the attic of his house. I flew in through the opening. It was a typical attic. There were some
dusty old cardboard boxes full of Jake and Tom's old baby clothes. There were open boxes of
Christmas lights and decorations. There was a chest of drawers with a top that had been
scarred by something or other.
Jake had opened one of the drawers in the chest and packed it with an old blanket.
It was nice of him. Jake has always been a decent guy. In the old days he used to protect me
from the punks at school who liked to beat me up.
The old days. When I still went to school. How long ago had it been? A few weeks? A
month? Not even.
There was a Rubbermaid dish in a corner where no one was likely to see it. I was hungry. I
clutched the dish with my left talon and pried the lid off with my hooked beak.
Meat and potatoes and green beans. The meat was hamburger. I don't know how he arranged
to get the food. His mom probably thought he was sneaking scraps to his dog, Homer.
I hadn't told him yet, but I couldn't eat the vegetables or the potatoes. My system couldn't
deal with much except meat. I... the hawk... was a predator. In the wild, hawks live on rat
and squirrel and rabbit.
I ate some of the hamburger. It was cold. It was dead. It made me feel bad to be eating it, but
it filled me up.
But it wasn't dead meat that I wanted. I wanted live meat. I wanted living, breathing,
scurrying prey. I wanted to swoop down on it and grab it with my razor talons and tear into it.
That's what I wanted. What the hawk wanted. And when it came to food, it was hard to deny
the hawk brain in my head. The hunger I felt was the hunger of the hawk.
I flopped and hopped up into my drawer. But it was soft. And what my hawk body wanted
was not the warmth and comfort of the blanket.
Hawks make nests of sticks. Hawks spend their nights on a friendly branch, feeling the
breeze, hearing the nervous chittering of prey, watching the owls hunt.
I hopped up out of the drawer. I couldn't stay there. I was so tired I was past being able to
rest. I was restless.
I flew back out into the night. Hawks are not usually nocturnal. The night belongs to other
hunters. But I wasn't ready to rest.
I flew aimlessly for a while, but I knew in my heart where I was going.
37
Rachel's bedroom light was still on. I fluttered down and landed on a birdhouse she had
deliberately nailed out there for me to land on when I came over.
I rustled my wing softly against the glass. I scratched with one talon. Rachel?
A moment later the window slid up. She was there, wearing a bathrobe and fuzzy slippers.
"Hi," she said. "I was worried about you!"
Why? I asked. But I knew the answer.
"We weren't very sensitive this afternoon," she said. She spoke in a whisper. We couldn't let
her mother or one of her little sisters overhear her having a one-sided conversation with no
one.
Don't be silly, I said. You guys barely escaped being... you know.
"Come inside. I have my bedroom door locked."
I hopped in through the window and fluttered over to her dresser.
Suddenly I realized something was behind me. I turned my head around. It was a mirror. I
was looking at myself.
I had a reddish tail of long straight feathers. The rest of my back was mottled dark brown. I
had big shoulders that looked kind of hunched, like I was a football lineman ready for the
snap. My head was streamlined. My brown eyes were fierce as I stared over the deadly
weapon of my beak.
I turned my head forward, looking away from my reflection. I don't know what's happening
to me, Rachel.
"What do you mean, Tobias?"
I wish I could have smiled. She looked so worried. I wish I could have smiled, just a little, to
make her feel better.
Rachel. I think I'm losing myself.
"Wh - What... How do you mean?" she asked. She bit her lip and tried not to let me see. But
of course, hawk eyes miss nothing.
Today the hawk we freed... she was there. At the lake. I wanted to go with her. I felt like I
belonged with her.
"You belong with us," Rachel said firmly. "You are a human being, Tobias."
How can you be so sure? I asked her.
"Because what counts is what is in your head and in your heart," she said with sudden
passion. "A person isn't his body. A person isn't what's on the outside."
38
Rachel... I don't even remember what I looked like.
I could see that she wanted to cry. But Rachel is a person with strength that runs all the way
through her. Maybe that's why I came to see her. I needed someone to be sure. I wanted
someone to let me borrow a little of their strength.
She went over to her nightstand and opened the drawer. She rummaged for a minute, then
came back to me. She was holding a small photograph. She turned it so I could see.
It was me. The me I used to be.
I didn't know you had a picture of me, I said.
She nodded. "It's not a great picture. In real life you look better."
In real life, I echoed.
"Tobias, someday the Andalites will return. If they don't, we're all lost, all the human race. If
they do come back, I know they'll have some way to return you to your own body."
I wish I was sure, I said.
"I am sure," she said. She put every ounce of faith into those three words. She wanted me to
believe. But I could see the tears that were threatening to well up in her eyes as she lied.
Like I said, hawks don't miss much.
39
CHAPTER 13
Talking to Rachel helped. A little, anyway. I spent the night in my little drawer in Jake's attic.
I spent the next day flying around, waiting for my friends to get out of school. In some ways,
I realized, my situation wasn't all bad. For one thing, I had no homework. For another, I could
fly. How many average kids can hit forty miles per hour in level flight and break eighty in a
stoop - a dive?
I went to the beach and rode the thermals there. It was best where the cliffs pressed right up
against the blue ocean.
I saw some prey, some mice and voles in the grass along the top of the cliff, but I ignored
them. I was Tobias. I was human.
Jake had called a meeting for all of us for that evening in his room. Tom, Jake's brother,
would be away at a meeting of The Sharing.
The Sharing is a "front" for the Yeerks. They pretend it's just some kind of Boy Scouts or
whatever, but its real purpose is to recruit voluntary hosts for the Yeerks.
I've gotten into the habit of checking people's watches from up in the air. Also, you know
how banks sometimes will have a big sign showing the time and temperature? Those are
helpful, too.
It's strange the things you miss when you lose your human body. Like showers. Like really
sleeping, all the way, totally passed out. Or like knowing what time it is.
In the afternoon I flew back to the school. I drifted around overhead till it let out. Then I
waited till I saw Jake, Rachel, Cassie, and Marco come out. They came out separately. Marco
had pointed out that it was bad security for them to be seen together all the time.
I followed the bus with Jake and Rachel in it. They lived closest, just a few blocks away from
each other. Marco lived in some apartments on the other side of the boulevard. He lived with
just his dad, since his mom drowned a few years ago.
Cassie had to travel farthest, out to the farm, which was about a mile from the others. For me
it was about a three-minute flight.
Like I say, there are some good things about having wings. I guess really it's okay most of the
time. Really.
I floated on a nice thermal above Jake's house, waiting for him to get home. I saw him get off
the bus and go inside. I couldn't see Rachel from where I was because there were trees in the
way, but I did see Marco for just a second or two.
I concentrated on watching my friends. That way I didn't notice the squirrels in the trees as
much. Or the mice that poked their little noses from their holes and sniffed the air.
After a while I saw Tom leave Jake's house.
Tom looks just like Jake, only he's bigger and has shorter hair. I'd never really known Tom
well. But it was during the doomed attempt to rescue him from the Yeerk pool that I was
trapped.
40
He headed down the street, acting nonchalant. Then, a block away, a car pulled up and
opened a door. He jumped in.
Off to his meeting of The Sharing.
After a while, I saw the others start to head for Jake's house. I could identify Rachel easily.
She was practicing for her gymnastics as she walked. She would walk along the edges of
curbs, pretending they were balance beams.
I flew in Jake's window once everyone was there. I didn't want it to look like I'd been hanging
around all that time with nothing to do.
"About time," Marco said. "We've all been waiting here for like an hour."
They'd been there for about two minutes. I'm a busy bird, I said. I lost track of time.
"We better make this kind of quick," Cassie said. "Ms. Lambert gave us papers to write by
day after tomorrow, and I promised my dad I'd help him release this great horned owl. He
was a mess. He'd landed on a power line and got fried. But he's ready to go now. We have a
habitat picked out."
"Friend of yours, Tobias?" Marco teased me.
The others all shot him nasty looks. But the truth was, it made me feel okay to be teased by
Marco. Marco teased everyone.
We hawks don't hang with owls, I said. They do nights, we mostly do days.
"He's a beautiful animal," Cassie said.
I see them sometimes at night, I said. They're amazing. So cool. Totally silent. Their
wings don't make a sound. One can fly an inch in front of your face and you won't hear it.
"Um, okay, look, if Cassie has to get going, maybe we better deal with business," Jake said.
"Yeah, if you two are done with the bird-talk part of the meeting," Marco added.
"I have to get going soon, too," Rachel said. She looked a little embarrassed. "My gymnastics
class is putting on an exhibition at the mall."
"Oh, I'm there," Marco crowed.
"No, you are not there," Rachel snapped. "None of you is going near that place. You know
how I feel about having to put on stupid exhibitions."
Rachel is not one of those people who like to perform in front of a crowd.
"We have learned how the Yeerks get their air and water," Jake said, trying to get down to
business. "And we even know where they do it. And we more or less know when. There
ought to be some way for us to use this information. Any ideas?"
41
Rachel shrugged. "We try and find a way to destroy the ship."
Marco raised his hand like he was in class. "How about if we, um, go back to talking about
birds?"
Rachel ignored him, as she usually did. "Look, we find some way to destroy that ship and
maybe the Yeerks will run out of air and water. Maybe that will even mean that they have to
give up and go home."
"Maybe," Cassie said. "Or they may have a dozen more of those ships in different places all
over the earth. We don't know how many ships they have."
"This one would be all we need if - " Marco began to say. Then I guess he realized he was
about to suggest something dangerous. "I mean... nothing."
"What?" Jake asked him. "'What were you going to say?"
Marco looked trapped. He shrugged. "Okay, look, what if that ship didn't get blown up or
disintegrated or whatever. What if it was flying over the city and suddenly the cloaking
device was turned off?"
We were all silent while we thought about that image. Suddenly a million people would look
up in the sky and see a ship the size of a skyscraper.
"People would probably notice it," Jake said.
"Oh yeah, they would notice it," Rachel agreed. "Radar would see it, too. A million
eyewitnesses. The Controllers would never be able to cover it up!"
People would videotape it, I said. They would take pictures. There would be radar
tapes.
Jake grinned. "The whole world would see. The entire human race would realize what was
happening." He was getting excited now. "And then we could go to the authorities. The
Controllers wouldn't be able to stop us! We could tell all we know!"
Rachel's eyes were gleaming. "We could tell them about The Sharing. We could turn in
Chapman!"
"And you figure Visser Three and his pals are just going to sit around and do nothing?"
Marco asked. "Like you said, we have no idea how many ships they have. Or how much
power."
Jake looked a little disappointed.
They don't have enough power to attack Earth openly, I said.
"And how do you know that?" Marco asked.
Because they are going to a lot of trouble to keep themselves a big secret. You don't hide if
you're tough enough to come out and kick butt in a fair fight.
I expected Marco to have some smart comeback. But he just nodded. "Yeah, you're right."
42
"This could be our big chance," Rachel said. "Uncloak that ship, so the whole world can see."
"I hate to ask this," Marco said with a groan, "but how do you think you're going to do that?"
It was Jake who answered. "We'll have to get inside that ship." He winked at Marco. "Want
to know how?"
Marco shook his head. "Not really."
"Through the water pipes. As fish."
Marco sighed. "Jake, I just told you I didn't want to know."
43
CHAPTER 14
Rachel and Cassie took off, heading in different directions.
"Have a good show," Cassie called to Rachel.
"Yeah, right," Rachel said grumpily.
"I'll be there soon," Marco told Rachel. "Don't fall off any balance beams until I get there."
Rachel shot Marco one of her "you're a dead man if you mess with me" looks and
disappeared, leaving just Marco, Jake, and me.
"She really kind of likes me," Marco said, with a wink at Jake and me.
"Uh-uh," Jake commented dryly. "Look, Tobias, if we're going to do this mission, it can't be
till the weekend."
Why?
"The timing. We have to morph to travel up there. There are no buses and we can't walk that
far in human bodies. Even as wolves, though, it takes time. It took more than an hour last
time. It just seemed to me that we might want to get up there in the morning, camp out
somewhere hidden, and then be ready by afternoon when the Yeerks show up."
"And this time we may want to travel around that other wolf pack's territory," Marco pointed
out. "I don't want to get into it with them again."
It made sense. I guess you're right. So if you're going to camp early in the day, you need a
Saturdays
"Anyway, it might be a good idea if we had as much information about the area as we can
get." Jake gave me a thoughtful look. "So I was thinking - "
Yeah, I interrupted. I'll spy out the situation. I'll look for someplace you can hide. I have
a lot of time on my hands. No hands, exactly, but lots of time.
Marco and Jake both laughed. I think Marco was surprised that I could make a joke about
myself.
I saw an intense look in Jake's eyes. He was wondering if I was okay.
I'm cool, I thought-spoke privately to him, so Marco couldn't hear. I was just a little
weirded-out by watching you all struggle to get out of those wolf morphs.
He raised an eyebrow and nodded. He had been upset, too. I could imagine. I suspected there
had been a lot of nightmares over that mess.
"Okay, so now what?" Marco asked. "Do I sneak into the mall without Rachel being able to
see me, or do we all sit around and play Doom?"
44
"I have homework," Jake said. "And trust me, Marco, if Rachel sees you at the mall making
faces while she's on the balance beam, she will turn into an elephant and stomp you."
Marco winced. "Remember the good old days when all a girl could do to you was call you
names?"
I flew off, leaving them to play video games or do homework, or however they ended up
killing time. Either way, it wasn't something I could participate in.
It's kind of a shame, really. With my eyesight and the reaction time I have, I could probably
be major competition in Doom.
But joysticks and control pads aren't made for talons.
I swooped out into the cool afternoon.
I drifted around for a while. I checked out Chapman's house. Chapman is our assistant
principal. He's also one of the highest-ranking Controllers.
When we first learned Chapman was one of them, he was ordering a Hork-Bajir to kill any of
us who were caught. He told the Hork-Bajir to save our heads for identification. Not the kind
of thing you expect to hear.
Even from an assistant principal.
But it turned out things were more complicated than we thought. Chapman had joined the
Yeerks. But he had done it in part to save his daughter, Melissa.
Melissa would be at the gymnastics thing with Rachel. At the mall.
Remembering the mall made me sad. It was just another one of the places I couldn't go
anymore. There was a long list: school, movie theaters, amusement parks...
Wait a minute. I could go to the amusement park. And I wouldn't even have to pay
admission.
The thought made me happy. I don't know why. It wasn't like I could ride the roller coaster.
But still, the idea kind of perked me up.
I could bust right into The Gardens any time I wanted. Come to think of it, I could also watch
any football or baseball game I ever wanted to see, too, as long as it was outdoors.
And concerts!
Whoa! Big stadium concerts, no problem. No tickets needed.
That's the way I needed to be thinking. There were millions of things I could do as a bird that
I couldn't do as a human.
But not right now. I turned and headed toward the mountains. I had a job to do. It was
another good thing about being me. I was the ultimate airborne spy.
45
There was a long line of towering clouds running to the mountains. Perfect weather for me.
Thermals are what push those clouds up so high.
I just let myself get into it. It wasn't a bad life. Not really.
I was flying. Back when I was in my old body, I used to look up in the sky and wish I could
fly. Now I could. I figured there were probably kids down on the ground right now looking
up at me and thinking, "Wow, that would be so cool."
If only I had something to eat. I was feeling a little hungry. Should have asked Jake to grab
me a snack.
It happened before I really even had time to think about it. I guess it was because I was
feeling good. Feeling relaxed.
I was above the woods, just a half mile or so beyond Cassie's farm. The trees opened up to
form a little meadow. This is what red-tails love. A little meadow.
It was full of prey. Squirrels scouring the ground for nuts. Hopping, then sitting up on their
hind legs to look around nervously. Mice that scurried from hole to hole. Rabbits.
A rat.
My eyes focused on it with absolute intensity. I sort of shrugged one shoulder, turned sharply
in midair, and plummeted toward the earth in a stoop.
My wings were back. My head low. My talons tucked back for maximum speed.
Sudden flare! I opened my wings. The shock of the air. Talons raked forward. Eyes never
moving even a millimeter from the rat.
Focus!
I struck!
An incredible rush of excitement surged through me. I was ecstatic! Ecstatic! That's the only
word for it. It was intense beyond anything I had ever experienced.
Talons hit warm flesh. My razor claws squeezed. The rat squirmed in my grip. But it was
helpless! Helpless!
I was in a frenzy.
I hooded my wings around my kill, shielding it from any other predator that might try to steal
it away.
NO! NO! NO! NO! NO!
I fell back.
I looked down at my talons. They were red with blood.
46
Rat meat dripped from my beak.
In my panic, I forgot what I was. I tried to run away. But I no longer had legs and feet to run
with. I had killing talons. Bloody talons.
I fell in the dirt.
No, I cried voicelessly. But I could still see the dead rat. And I could taste it. And no matter
how many times I said "no," it would always be "yes."
47
CHAPTER 15
I flew.
I flew as fast and as hard as I could. I wanted to go so fast that the memory of killing and
eating the rat would be left way behind me.
But not even I can fly that fast.
Human! I am human! I am Tobias!
I don't know why it was Rachel I wanted to see right at that moment. Maybe she was just the
closest thing I had to a real friend. Maybe it was the way she had seemed so sure of who and
what I was.
I needed someone to be sure.
Down below I saw the huge, irregular rectangles of the mall. I saw a glass door. People
streamed in and out. Rachel. That's where she was.
"Tseeeeer!"
I screamed in rage and frustration and terror as I stooped. I shot toward the door like I'd shot
toward the rat.
But I wasn't going to stop. I wasn't going to slow down. I was just going to end this right
now. I would hit the glass at full speed and maybe that would awaken me from this
nightmare.
The speed just kept building. The door rushed up at me. The earth itself was jumping up to
hit me.
A guy, dark hair, short, stepped to the door. He opened it.
Shwoooop!
I must have been doing eighty as I hurtled through the open door.
A second set of doors, but these were open, too.
No impact.
No awakening.
Colors and bright lights all around me. Like a high-speed kaleidoscope.
The Gap. Express. The Body Shop. Easy Spirit. Mrs. Fields.
Zoom!
I was a bullet, blazing inches over the heads of the shoppers. I heard screams. I heard cries of
amazement.
48
I didn't care. I wanted to hit something. I wanted to wake up. I wanted to fall to the ground
because my wings had disappeared and been replaced by clumsy legs and flailing arms.
I wanted to be me again.
I am human! I am human! I am Tobias!
Nine West. Radio Shack. B. Dalton. Benetton. A world I knew. A world where I belonged.
Places I had been. Foods I had eaten. The world of human beings.
Zoom!
Suddenly, in seconds, I was at the center of the mall.
A crowd was standing around in a circle. In the middle of the circle blue mats were on the
floor. Girls in leotards were doing midair flips and graceful backbends. People on the upper
level were crowded around the railing to look down.
Rachel was on the balance beam. She was just raising one leg, balancing on the other.
I was a brown and gold and red missile shooting past her.
"Tobias!" she cried.
Straight ahead, a wall. A blank wall where they were going to put a new shop. I was still
moving fast. I could still hit it and wake myself up from the nightmare.
"No!" Rachel cried.
I flared and shot straight up. The wall scraped my stomach. The ceiling was glass, a skylight.
I was there! A last-second turn, almost too late. My shoulder hit the glass. I bounced off and
began to fall down toward upraised faces staring at me with horror and amazement and pity.
I saw Rachel's face in that crowd. Her eyes pleaded silently. No, she mouthed. No.
I fell, stunned and dazed. Rachel, still balanced on the beam, caught me as I dropped. She fell
off and the two of us tumbled onto the mat.
"You have to get out of here!" she muttered tersely.
I killed, I cried. You don't understand, Rachel. I'm lost. I killed!
"No. As long as you have me and the others, you aren't lost, Tobias."
Helping hands were clawing, trying to save Rachel from the crazed, out-of-control bird. She
gave me a heave. Just enough to get me into the air. Anyone watching would have thought
she was trying to get me off her.
I flapped up, just out of reach of a dozen hands that clawed the air trying to grab me.
Someone threw a shopping bag at me. I dodged.
49
But there was no escape. Overhead I saw the skylight. Blue sky.
The hawk in my head wanted the sky. It knew safety was up in the high blue. The hawk
powered straight up. Straight up at the glass that he didn't understand. The glass that would
be like a brick wall.
But I couldn't fight it anymore. The hawk had won. I had killed. I had killed and eaten. And I
had loved it. The ecstasy of the hunt.
Ecstasy!
In a second it would all be over. One more stroke of my powerful wings and the glass...
Out of the corner of my eye I saw a familiar face on the upper level. Suddenly, something
shot past me. Small, white, stitched.
CRASH!
The baseball hit the glass just inches ahead of my beak. Just where Marco had aimed it. Glass
shards fell around me. I shot through the hole.
Sky!
The hawk flew fast and straight.
I let it go. I surrendered.
Tobias, a boy whose face I could no longer remember, no longer existed.
50
CHAPTER 16
The next few days were like a long, slow dream. I stayed away from Jake's house. I did not
communicate with my friends. I disappeared.
I found a place for myself. It was perfect red-tail territory - the place where I had made my
first kill. A nice meadow surrounded by trees. Not far off there was a marshy area that was
good, too. Although there was another red-tail who had a territory over there, so I couldn't
hunt there often.
I spent my days hunting. Sometimes I would ride the high hot winds and watch the meadow.
Sometimes I would sit in a tree and watch till some unwary creature ventured out. Then I
would swoop down on it, snatch it up, kill it. Eat it while the blood was still warm.
Days were easier than nights. During the day I was hunting almost all the time. It keeps you
busy, because most of the time you miss. It can take quite a few tries before you make a kill.
Nights were worse. I couldn't hunt at night. The nights belong to other predators, mostly the
owls. At night my human mind would surface.
The human in my head would show me memories. Pictures of human life. Pictures of his
friends.
The human in my head was sad. Lonely.
But the human Tobias really just wanted to sleep. He wanted to disappear and let the hawk
rule. He wanted to accept that he was no longer human.
Still, at night, as I sat on my familiar branch and watched the owls do their silent, deadly
work, the human memories would play in my head.
But other memories were there, too. I remembered the female hawk. The one who had been
in the cage. I knew where her territory was. Near a clear lake in the mountains.
So one day I flew there. To the mountain lake.
I saw her down on a tree branch. She was watching a baby raccoon, preparing to go for a kill.
She would have to be very hungry to go for a raccoon, no matter how small. Raccoons are
very tough, very violent creatures.
As I watched, unnoticed by her, she swooped.
The raccoon spotted her. A quick dodge left, and the hawk sailed harmlessly past. The baby
raccoon ran for the edge of the woods. His mother was there.
No hawk was crazy enough to go after a full-grown raccoon. That was not a fight the hawk
was going to win.
She settled back on her branch.
I floated overhead, waiting to see if she would spot me. And waiting to see what she would
do when she did notice me. I had to be cautious. She was a female, and females are a third
bigger, on average, than males.
51
Suddenly I saw fast movement in the woods.
A chase!
It was always kind of exciting watching a kill, even by another species. It heightened my own
hunting edge.
The prey was running awkwardly on its two legs. Running and threading its way through the
underbrush. It stumbled and hit the ground hard. It seemed very slow to get up. It ran again.
I could hear gasping breath. It was weakening. The prey was squealing. Loud, yelping
vocalizations.
Prey often squeal.
The predator moved on two legs also. But these legs were built for greater speed. It had
blades growing from its arms. It used the blades to slash the bushes and weeds. It cleared its
way through them like a lawn mower chopping down tall grass.
Lawn mower?
No. Something else. Salad Shooter. Yes, that's what Marco called them.
Marco? The image came to my mind. Short. Dark hair. Human.
It hit me like a lightning bolt. Suddenly I realized: This prey was a human.
Why should I care? It was prey. That was the way it worked: Predator killed prey.
NO! It was a human being.
"Help! Help!" That was the vocalization. It meant something. "Help! Help me!"
The predator was very close. In a few seconds he would make his kill. The predator was
powerful. The predator was swift.
Hork-Bajir.
"Help me, someone help!"
I don't know how to describe what happened next. It was like my entire world flipped over.
Like one minute it was one thing, one way, then, boom, it was something totally different. It
was like opening your eyes after a dream.
The prey was a human being. The predator was a Hork-Bajir. This was wrong. Wrong! It had
to be stopped.
I stopped.
52
A few seconds earlier I was thinking that no sane hawk would go after a full-grown raccoon.
Now I was going after a Hork-Bajir. Hork-Bajir compare to raccoons like a nuclear bomb
compares to a bow and arrow.
It would have to be the eyes. The eyes were the only weak spot.
"Tseeeeer!"
I rocketed toward the Hork-Bajir. The human slipped and fell again.
Talons forward. The Hork-Bajir was totally focused on his prey. I hit him fast and hard and
sailed past.
"Gurrawwwrr!" the Hork-Bajir yelled. He clutched at his eyes.
The human was up and running again.
"Gurr gafrasch! To me! Getting away! Hilch nahurrn!",the Hork-Bajir yelled, in the strange
combination of human and alien speech that they use when working with humans.
He was calling for help. I used my momentum to soar up over the tops of the trees. He had
plenty of help available. Another Hork-Bajir about a thousand yards off. And two of the
bogus Park Rangers were nearer.
It was all coming back to me. The fake Park Rangers. The Hork-Bajir enforcers. This was the
lake. A Yeerk supply ship must be on its way in.
Yeerks. Andalites.
My friends, the Animorphs.
Yes, my friends. I remembered now. But this human was not one of them. This human prey
was older. A stranger.
The freed hawk was watching me. I could almost feel her drawing me toward her. It was like
a magnet. She was my kind. She was like me.
But the Park Rangers were in hot pursuit of the human now. The human was nothing like me.
Poor, clumsy ground runner that he was. He was just prey.
And yet, for some reason, I couldn't let him be prey.
I couldn't. Me.
Tobias.
53
CHAPTER 17
I landed on the perch outside Rachel's window. It was night. But she wasn't asleep. She was
reading a book in bed, propped up by several pillows.
I fluttered a wing against the glass.
Rachel?
She started. The book went flying. She jumped up and ran to the window, throwing it open.
"Tobias?"
More or less, I said wryly.
She started to hug me, to put her arms around me. But then she realized that wasn't possible.
Birds aren't exactly made for hugging.
"Are you okay? We've all been terrified. Cassie said maybe you were killed or something.
There are all kinds of things that can happen. Jake is so depressed."
I'm okay, I said. I flapped over to her dresser.
Now that she was sure I was safe, she started getting mad. It made me smile inwardly. That
was Rachel for you.
"Tobias, what is the deal with you? Why would you just disappear and leave us all worrying
for days?"
It's hard to explain, I said. I guess... the hawk sort of won out over me. Not that it's
really that way. I mean, the hawk instincts... they're strong. I told her about my first kill.
About how much it horrified me.
I don't know how I expected her to react. She tried to look sympathetic, but I could see it
bothered her.
I lost control, I admitted. For the last couple of days I've been living like a hawk. All the
way, like a hawk. I think I was starting to forget... me. I was starting to lose touch with
humans. Then something happened
"What?" She went to check her door and make sure neither of her sisters was nearby. I could
hear that the house was quiet. "What happened?"
I told her about going to the lake. I told her about the guy being chased by Hork-Bajir.
Fortunately, I can see the terrain better than the Hork-Bajir or those human-Controller Park
Rangers. I led him away from them. I told him when to hide and when to run.
"You talked to him?"
I thought-spoke, yes. There was no alternative. I couldn't let them catch him. He had seen a
Hork-Bajir. They would never have let him
54
Rachel looked stunned. "But now he knows about you! And he knows about the Hork-Bajir."
What's he going to do? Go tell people he was chased through the woods by an alien
monster, and rescued by a telepathic bird?
Rachel laughed. "Yeah, good point. People would just think he was insane. Besides, if he
started talking openly about the Yeerks, they would find him and silence him."
Exactly what I explained to him. I think he'll probably keep quiet. He'll try to forget it ever
happened.
"You saved him," Rachel said.
I almost didn't, I admitted. At first I just saw another predator and his prey. No different
from watching the owls at night. No different from what I do myself. Kill to eat.
Rachel thought about that for a moment. "The Yeerks and their slaves aren't killing to eat,"
she said. "They are killing to control and dominate. Killing because it's the only way you can
eat, because that's the way nature designed you, that's one thing. Killing because you want
power or control is evil."
I guess you're right, I said. I hadn't thought about it that way.
"What you did... eating... you know, whatever. Well, that's natural for the hawk. Nothing
a Hork-Bajir does is natural. They aren't even in control of their own bodies or minds. They
are tools of the Yeerks. And the Yeerks only want power and domination."
I know, I said. But I wasn't totally convinced. Still, it was comforting to be talking to
Rachel.
"You are human, Tobias," she told me softly.
Yeah. Maybe. I don't know. Sometimes I just feel so trapped. I want to move my fingers,
but I don't have any. I want to speak out loud, but I have a mouth that's only good for ripping
and tearing.
Rachel looked like she might start crying. It was alarming to me, because Rachel isn't a girl
who bursts out in tears, ever.
Anyway, look, I'm sorry I ruined your exhibition at the mall the other day.
She smiled. "What do you mean? It was perfect. I was just starting my routine, and you know
how much I hate to have to do public shows like that. You put an end to the whole thing real
fast."
I laughed silently. I can imagine. I hope no one was hurt by the falling glass.
"No, everyone was fine. But what were you going to do if Marco had missed with that
baseball? You would have hit the glass awfully hard."
55
I didn't know what to say.
Rachel came closer and stroked my crest with her hand. It made the hawk in me
uncomfortable. But at the same time, it was similar to preening, which is kind of pleasurable.
"What I told you the other day, Tobias... remember? You're not lost as long as you have
Jake and Cassie and me. Even Marco. He came through for you, big time. We're your friends.
You're not alone."
I think I would have cried then. But hawks can't cry.
"And someday, the Andalites will come...."
Someday, I said, trying to sound confident. Well, I better go see Jake. The mission is
supposed to begin tomorrows
"We don't have to go through with that," Rachel said.
Yes, we do, I said. More than ever, I understand that. See... there are human beings all
over, trapped in bodies controlled by Yeerks. Trapped. Unable to escape. Rachel, I know how
they feel. Maybe I can't escape. Maybe I am trapped forever. But if we can free some of those
others. Maybe... I don't know. Maybe that's what I need to do to stay human.
56
CHAPTER 18
The next day, we went ahead with the mission. I flew cover overhead while four gray wolves
ran beneath me. We timed it so we would arrive in the area very early in the morning, many
hours before the Yeerks would arrive to hunt intruders.
So, let me get this straight, Tobias, Marco said. You're taking us to a bear cave? As in big
grizzly bears? And this is a good thing?
Not grizzlies, Cassie interrupted. Not in this area. We'd be talking black bears. They're
much smaller.
Swell. I am totally reassured. Just a small bear cave.
The bears are long gone, I said. There are just a few bears around, and this cave is empty.
Trust me. I spied it out yesterday. I've seen raccoons and skunks running in and out of there.
They wouldn't be doing that if there were bears.
Excuse me. Jake? Did Tobias just say 'skunks'? I must have heard wrong, because only an
idiot would think hanging out with skunks is a good idea.
We're not going to hang out with skunks, Jake said patiently.
The skunks don't live there, I said. They just run in there to get away from predators.
I didn't have to explain any more. I think everyone guessed how I knew that skunks ran in
there to get away from predators.
Look, it's close to the lake but I don't think the Yeerks know about it, I said. Sorry, but
there wasn't a convenient Marriott hotel where I could get you a room for the night.
So, that means no room service, either? Marco asked. Well, okay. As long as this cave
gets cable. The big game's on ESPN tonight.
I was carrying a tiny nylon pouch that Rachel had put together. It was tan in color, so a casual
observer wouldn't notice it and wonder why a red-tail hawk was carrying luggage.
In the sack was a small watch. It weighed almost nothing. There were also some fish hooks,
fishing line, and a small lighter. All together it only weighed about two ounces. But it did
slow me down a little.
We reached the cave with plenty of time to spare on the two-hour deadline.
Oh, this looks lovely, Marco said, looking at the thorns and a scrub brush around the cave
entrance.
I haven't really been inside, I admitted.
I landed outside the entrance. The opening to the cave was no more than two feet across and
about four feet high. It was easy for Jake and Rachel, in their wolf morphs, to leap nimbly
through. Unless there really was a bear inside, they would scare off whatever might be in
there.
57
Empty, Rachel reported. Nothing in here but a couple of spiders and a scared mouse.
I decided to try a joke. Chase him out here. I'm hungry.
Only Marco laughed. The others all acted like I'd said something embarrassing. Maybe I had.
Let's morph back, Marco suggested. One close call with being trapped as a wolf is plenty
for me.
I'll go look around, I said. Sometimes I didn't like being there when they morphed.
A few minutes later they all came out. Marco was complaining, as usual. "You know, we
really have to figure out how to deal with the shoe situation," he muttered. "Thorns and no
shoes. Not a good combination."
The four of them were barefoot and dressed only in their morphing outfits: leotards for the
girls, bike shorts and tight T-shirts for Jake and Marco.
"We need to gather firewood," Jake said, with his hands on his hips. "It wouldn't hurt to
warm that cave up a little before the Yeerks get here."
"Don't you love it when Jake's all masterful like that?" Rachel teased.
"I'm just trying to get us organized," Jake said defensively.
"We'd better get started fishing," Cassie pointed out. "If we don't catch a fish, we're pretty
much wasting our time."
The plan was to morph into fish to enter the Yeerk ship's water pipes. Of course, in order to
morph into something, you first have to "acquire" it. Which means being able to touch it.
"Shouldn't be any big problem," Jake said confidently.
"Uh-huh," Cassie said dryly. "And how many times have you gone fishing?"
"Counting this time? Once." He laughed.
Cassie rolled her eyes. "Typical suburban boy," she said affectionately. "It isn't all that easy."
Then you guys better get started, I advised. I'll go look around.
"Take care of yourself, Tobias," Rachel called out as I took wing.
I watched from on high as they made one failed attempt after another to convince a fish to
bite one of our hooks.
It seemed ridiculous, but the entire plan was hanging on the question of whether or not we
could catch a fish. And time was running out. The day wore on. Still no fish.
58
Jake was getting edgy. Rachel was downright cranky. And Marco? Forget Marco. "This is
ridiculous!" he raged. "We're four - I mean, five - fairly intelligent human beings. And we
can't outsmart one fish that probably has an IQ of four?"
Cassie was the only one remaining calm. "Fishing is a matter of skill and luck," she said
placidly. "A smart fisherman learns not to become frustrated."
Jake looked at the little watch we'd brought along. "From what we know, the Yeerks will
start arriving in an hour to clear the area."
Rachel nodded. "Even if we catch a fish now, we won't have time to test the morph."
Maybe we should back off for today, I suggested. You really ought to test out the fish
morph. You guys all know how much trouble a morph can be at first.
Jake shook his head firmly. "I don't think so, Tobias. We'd have to wait till we had another
day off. Tomorrow's no good because I have stuff with my parents. So does Marco. Which
means we'd have to wait a whole week."
So we try again next weekend. What's the hurry?
"The hurry is that the Yeerks can't keep coming to this same lake forever. Sooner or later the
level of the water will start dropping, from them taking so much. They must use one lake for
a while, then move on to another. It could take forever for us to find where they move to
next."
It made sense. But that didn't make me feel any better about it.
This is the first water animal any of us have morphed. You don't have any idea what it's
going to be like.
"I know," Jake snapped. "Look, Tobias, I know it's not exactly ideal."
"Hah!" Cassie yelped. She yanked at the line she was holding. "I believe we may have a
fishy."
It took just a few seconds to haul in the fish.
"Trout," she said, looking it over as it flopped in the shallow water. The hook was poked
through its lip. It was about ten inches long, not very big.
The four of them stared blankly at it.
"We have to become that?" Marco asked.
"It's a fish," Cassie said. "What did you expect?"
Marco shrugged. "I don't know. Something more like Jaws. This is just a fish. I mean, we
could clean him and eat him with a little lemon juice. Maybe some fries on the side."
The others turned and gave him a dirty look.
59
Cassie reached down into the water and took hold of the squirmy gray thing. She
concentrated. Her eyes closed halfway. She was acquiring it. The fish DNA was being
absorbed into Cassie's body.
The gift of the Andalite. The curse of the Andalite - the power to morph.
60
CHAPTER 19
I don't like this plan, I blurted.
Jake looked up at me in surprise. "Tobias, you were in on the planning right from the start."
Look, don't you guys realize how dangerous this could be?
"I realize," Marco said. "I realize it plenty. But I thought you were the big, gung-ho Yeerkkiller.
Suddenly now you're afraid?"
I'm not afraid for me, I said. I'll be flying around safely while the four of you go up into
that ship.
Cassie nodded. "It's hard standing by while someone else is risking their life," she said. "I
understand how you feel. But there have been times when you were the one taking the risks."
"Look, we don't have time to debate this," Jake said. "We have a plan we've all agreed to.
Let's get on with it before the Yeerks show up." Jake gets peevish when someone questions
things after everything has already been decided. Usually it's Marco getting on his nerves.
"We'll be okay," Rachel said confidently. Rachel took the fish in her hand. The fish went
limp, as usual, while the acquiring was happening.
Suddenly I couldn't watch anymore. I'd just had a flash of memory, watching the four of them
straining to get out of their wolf bodies. What if they were trapped in fish morph?
The idea of being trapped was still not something any of them really understood. I mean, they
knew it had happened to me. But people are funny - they never think something bad will
happen to them. I knew it could happen.
And to be trapped as a fish? It made me sick just thinking about it. The rest of your life in the
body of a fish? Being trapped in a hawk's body seemed downright pleasant by comparison.
I'm going to go upstairs and see if anyone's coming, I said. I caught a small breeze and
flapped hard to clear the treetops.
It was tough work gaining enough altitude to get a good view of the area. It was mostly dead
air all around. But I was glad for the workout. It took my mind off imagining what life would
be like if my only friends in the world were trapped as fish in a mountain lake.
I would have laughed if it weren't so serious. I mean, come on, how many kids have to worry
about all their friends becoming fish? Life had definitely gotten strange since that night when
we saw the Andalite landing in the construction site.
I circled higher and higher till I could see the entire lake and most of the surrounding area.
No Park Rangers. Yet. I wondered if Jake was right and maybe the Yeerks would move on to
another lake. Maybe they already had.
Then, there, way down below, on a branch... the hawk. The female I had freed from
captivity.
61
She was watching me. I could see her eyes follow me across the sky. In part, I knew, she was
merely watching me for the simple reason that I was in her territory. Hawks are defensive
about their territory. They don't want strangers coming and grabbing all the best prey.
But I had the feeling that there was something more going on. She wanted me to join her. I
don't know how I knew that, but I did. She wanted me-to fly down to her.
Some people think hawks mate for just a season. Some people think they mate for life, and I
don't really know which is true.
One thing I knew for sure: I wasn't ready to settle down with anyone. Especially not a hawk.
And yet there was this feeling in me. Like... like I belonged with her.
I looked away. I would be glad when this mission was over and I no longer had to come here
to her territory. She confused me.
Suddenly, movement!
I had let myself be distracted.
Trucks! Jeeps! They were rolling down the road. They were within a mile and moving fast.
I looked frantically for my friends. There they were! I shrugged off the wind beneath my
wings and dropped toward them.
Here they come! I cried. Get to the cave!
They ran for the cave. But it was harder to crawl inside in their human bodies. The wolves'
thick pelts had protected them against the scratches and tears of the bushes.
Thwak thwak thwak thwak thwak!
Helicopters skimming above the trees!
Too fast. My friends were still struggling to make it to the shelter of the cave. One of the
helicopters was on a straight line to them.
Oh, man, I muttered. I still had a lot of my speed from the dive. I flapped hard, powering
up to maximum speed. Straight at the helicopter.
Straight at it.
I could see the pilot. A human-Controller. Beside him sat a Hork-Bajir.
Straight at them!
The chopper was doing ninety. I was doing a little less. The distance between me and the
chopper's windshield shortened very fast.
They weren't going to pull up!
62
CHAPTER 20
Thwak thwak thwak thwak thwak!
The sound of the rotors was a roar.
They were not going to pull up! We were going to hit.
But then, a flicker of the pilot's eyes, a twitch of his hand on the control stick.
I cranked right.
The helicopter cranked left.
It blew past me like a tornado. The backwash of the rotors caught me and tumbled me
through the air.
I fell, upside down. I folded my wings, flared my tail, and spun around. I opened my wings
and swooped neatly between two trees.
I banked left and flew over the cave. Rachel was the last one in. She was still clearly visible.
The helicopter would almost certainly have seen her.
I watched till she was safely inside.
Okay, you guys, I don't think anyone saw you. Be cool till I tell you it's time.
They couldn't answer, of course. They were still fully human, so they could hear my thoughtspeech,
but could not respond in kind.
The Yeerks went through the familiar routine. The phony Park Rangers fanned out around the
lake with automatic weapons ready. The helicopters buzzed around until they decided the
area was free of witnesses.
The helicopters landed and the Hork-Bajir jumped out. They seemed extra careful. Probably
Visser Three had given them all kinds of grief over the guy I had helped to escape the day
before.
Visser Three was not a creature you wanted mad at you.
Then, I felt it. The emptiness in the sky. The sense of something monstrously huge moving
slowly through the air.
It was above me.
Slowly it appeared, shimmering into reality like some kind of magic trick.
You could never get used to how big that thing was. It felt like someone was hanging a small
moon over your head.
I flew out from under it, over closer to the cave. It's here, I announced.
63
From behind the truck ship came the usual guard of Bug fighters. Only instead of two Bug
fighters, there were four. The Yeerks were definitely nervous this time. Two of the Bug
fighters remained on patrol. The other two landed in the clearing beside the helicopters.
Why? Why the extra security? Was it just because of the guy I had helped to escape?
I felt something new in the air above the hovering truck ship. Another cloaked ship!
Not as large, but from that emptiness in the sky I felt a dread that I had felt before.
The cloak shimmered out and the ship appeared.
Black within black, an outthrust spear, razor-edged - I had seen this ship before. The Blade
ship! I had seen it first at the construction site where the Andalite had been murdered while
we cried helplessly.
No wonder the Yeerks were nervous.
The Blade ship lowered toward the landing area. The Hork-Bajir on the ground and the Park
Rangers were in a frenzy now, searching the woods as if their lives depended on it.
Tssewww!
Someone had fired a Dracon beam. I looked and saw a deer in mid-leap sizzle and disappear.
The Yeerks were shooting anything that moved.
The doors of the Blade ship opened. More Hork-Bajir poured out, Dracon beams leveled.
Behind them came a pair of Taxxons, slithering and shimmying on their needle legs,
undulating their gross caterpillar bodies.
And last, he stepped out: dainty Andalite hooves. Deadly Andalite tail, like a scorpion's. The
mouthless Andalite face. The two small Andalite arms with too many fingers. The two
mobile eyes mounted on antlerlike stalks that turned this way and that, always searching, so
that the large main eyes could focus on one thing at a time.
An Andalite body.
But not an Andalite mind. For in that Andalite body lived a Yeerk. The only AndaliteController.
The only Yeerk ever to enslave an Andalite. And thus, the only Yeerk to have the
power to morph.
I dropped down into the trees. I waited till a patrolling Hork-Bajir had walked past the cave
where my friends hid.
When I was sure no one would see, I fluttered down and into the cave, scraping the bushes on
either side.
"Tobias? Is that you?" Jake whispered.
Yes.
64
"What are you doing here? That's not the plan."
Forget the plan. He's here.
No one asked who. They all knew from the way I had said it.
He was here.
Visser Three.
65
CHAPTER 21
"What is he doing here?" Cassie asked in a low, frightened whisper.
I guess he just came to oversee this trip. Maybe it was because they let that guy get away.
"He's here to kick butt on his boys," Marco said, trying to sound tough. "They screwed up
and-now he's here to make sure they don't do it again."
It doesn't really matter why he's here, I pointed out. He's here. And there are extra HorkBajir
and the whole crowd is way nervous. One of the Hork-Bajir Draconed a deer that just
happened to be walking by.
"A deer?" Cassie cried. "Those stupid jerks. Deer never hurt anyone."
The plan was for you to sneak down to the water, morph as soon as you got there, and head
out for the ship's water-intake pipe, I reminded them. It was always a dangerous plan, but
now it's impossible. Four of you walking down to the water, then morphing? That's not going
to happen. Not as alert as these guys are now.
"Not with Visser Three-hanging around," Marco agreed.
"I disagree." It was Rachel. "I think we should still try this. Look, if we pull this off, if we
manage to get inside that ship and disable the cloaking device while they're over the city...
this whole thing will be over."
Jake jumped in to support her. "We've always said, if there was just some way to show the
world what was happening... well, this is the way. This would be way too big for the
Controllers to cover up. I don't care what they are. Even if the mayor and the governor and
the entire police force were Controllers, they couldn't cover up something like this."
Jake, you're not listening. I'm telling you: There is no way you four can cruise down to the
lake. You'll be dead before you take five steps!
For a while no one spoke. It was Cassie who finally broke the silence. "There may be a way,"
she said. "See, a fish can survive out of water for a couple of minutes. And the fish we're
morphing is small." She looked at me. "Small enough for a red-tailed hawk to carry."
Well. That idea got everyone's attention, I can tell you.
"Excuse me?" Marco shrilled. "Are you saying you want me to not just morph into a fish, but
to morph into a fish out of water and then be carried through the air by a bird?"
Cassie bit her lip. "I'm just saying it could work."
"It would work," Jake said. He and Rachel exchanged a slightly insane look that said, "Okay,
let's try it!"
No way, I said. You guys are-crazy. No offense, but this raises the danger level way
beyond what it was to start with.
"I know it's dangerous," Jake said. "But we may never get a chance this good."
66
Marco whined. I argued. But in the end it was three against two. Besides, Jake was right: We
had a chance to seriously mess up the Yeerks.
I have watched Marco morph into a gorilla, Rachel become an elephant and a shrew and a
cat, Cassie become a horse, and Jake become a tiger and a flea (man, was that weird!). But
this was the first time anyone had tried morphing into an animal that lived in water.
Cassie insisted on going first. "It was my idea," she pointed out. She did not point out that
she was also the best morpher.
"If you feel like you're suffocating, you have to back out of the morph," Jake told her. He
took her hand. "Are you listening to me? You have to back out if it gets bad. You can't pass
out halfway into a morph."
Cassie smiled. "I will. Don't worry about me."
She closed her eyes and began to concentrate.
I've told you that Cassie is always the best at controlling a morph. She has an almost artistic
talent, where she can make it all look kind of cool and not so gross.
But not this time.
As I watched, her hair disappeared completely. Her skin began to harden, like it was coated
with varnish or something. Like she had been dipped in clear plastic.
Her eyes swung around to the side of her head. Her face bulged out into a huge mouth that
gaped and seemed to be blowing invisible bubbles.
As this happened, she was shrinking. But not fast enough. I could still see every nightmare
change in her body. The way her legs shriveled up, smaller and smaller, till her legless body
fell to the ground.
From her lower back her body stretched out, elongated.
"Ooohhh!" Rachel cried.
A tail had just suddenly spurted from Cassie's behind. A fish tail.
Now her varnished-looking skin cracked and split into a million scales.
Her ears were gone. Her arms were shriveling. She was no more than two feet long, lying
helpless, a monster, on the floor of the cave.
So far I'm fine, she said, but her thought-speech was shaky. Still... breathing... with
my lungs.
But at that moment, two slits appeared in her neck.
Gills.
67
Aaaah! she cried.
"Cassie, pull out of it!" Jake cried in an urgent whisper.
No. No. Almost done. Tobias... 
I'm ready, I said grimly.
She was tiny now. Less than a foot long. All that was left of her human body were two very
tiny doll hands. They made little fins.
Cassie flopped wildly. Her mouth gasped silently.
"Go!" Jake said.
I closed careful talons around Cassie's squirming fish body, aimed for the small sliver of sky
that I could see through the cave's opening, and flapped my powerful wings.
I burst out of the cave into fresh air.
Are you okay, Cassie?
Fish mind... panicky... water. Water now!
Hang in there. You've been through this before. You know how it is when you first go into a
morph. You have to get control of the fish's instincts.
Water! Water! I can't breathe!
I was about ten feet up, racing for the water's edge. Suddenly, below me, a Hork-Bajir.
He looked up and saw me. A bird with a fish in his talons.
I doubted the Hork-Bajir would realize that red-tails don't catch fish. At least I hoped he
wouldn't.
I swooped down over the water. The huge Yeerk ship was just lowering its intake pipes into
the water. I dropped behind a stand of trees that hugged the shoreline.
Get ready! I warned Cassie. I Jet her go like one of those old World War Two planes
dropping its torpedo.
She hit the water with a small splash.
Are you all right?
No answer.
Cassie! I said, are you all right?
Y-y-yeah, she said at last. I'm here.
68
Are you dealing with the fish okay?
Again, no answer. Then, Whoa. Cool! I'm underwater!
I relaxed. Yes, you sure are underwater, I said with a laugh.
I was scared, she admitted. I... I know this sounds crazy. But I just keep seeing myself.
Fried. With a wedge of lemon and some tartar sauce. 
69
CHAPTER 22
Jake was next. He morphed and I flew him over the heads of two patrolling Park Rangers
who did not even seem to notice me.
Then came Marco. When I exited the cave with him I practically ran into a big Hork-Bajir.
He didn't take any notice of me, either.
Cassie's plan was working. Even with all the Controllers on maximum alert, it never occurred
to them that their enemy might be a bird with a fish in its talons.
Back in the cave, it was just Rachel.
So far so good, I said.
"Yeah. I guess so."
Are you nervous?
"I'd have to be crazy not to be nervous. Oh well. Here goes."
She started to morph. I'd seen three others do it now, so it wasn't a surprise to me. But it was
still horrifying to watch a friend, someone you cared about, twist and deform and mutate
before your eyes.
I don't think any of us will ever get used to morphing. Maybe the Andalites are used to it. I
don't know. But I'll bet it creeps them out, too, when they have to change.
I looked away as Rachel began to get strange and hideous.
She was almost completely a fish when it happened.
Crash! Crash! Someone was forcing their way through the bushes at the mouth of the cave.
"Heffrach neeth there." A Hork-Bajir!
"Yes, I see it," a human voice said grumpily. "You know, these human bodies aren't blind.
Just because you're in a Hork-Bajir, don't get delusions. Use those blades of yours to hack
some of these thorns out of the way."
I heard a sound like fast machetes, slicing away the vines and thorns.
"Better not find anything in here," the human-Controller said. "The Visser will do to you
what was done to that poor fool yesterday who let the human escape."
I looked at Rachel. It was too late for her to morph back.
What's going on? she asked.
Yeerks! A human-Controller and a Hork-Bajir-Controller, right outside the cave.
"Go in fergutth vir puny body. Ha ha."
70
"This was your sector to check. You didn't even notice this cave. Keep getting on my nerves
and I'll tell him!"
"He gulferch you and eat your lulcath. Ha ha."
Suddenly a human head appeared, followed by shoulders. He was wearing a Park Ranger's
outfit.
We have to make a break for it! I told Rachel. Here they come!
"Yeah, there's a cave in here, all right. There's some kind of a bird - "
I grabbed Rachel, now fully in fish morph. But the human-Controller blocked the narrow
entrance.
Well, I thought. It worked with a helicopter...
With a rush of wings I flew right at his face.
"What the - " He fell back, beating at the air.
I scraped past him.
The Hork-Bajir slashed at the air with one of his wrist blades. He shaved an inch off my tail.
But I was in the air now, and moving faster. Only it was hard with Rachel, The weight of a
fish is more than a red-tail can carry easily. And I had already carried three. I was tired.
Fortunately, I was also very scared. Fear can make you strong sometimes,
Ssseeeewww!
A Dracon beam sizzled the air above me!
Unfortunately for the Hork-Bajir who had fired, the Dracon beam did not stop when it buzzed
by me. No, the Dracon beam hit the underside of the vast truck ship. A small, neat, round
hole appeared in the bottom of the ship. It was too small to amount to anything.
But suddenly the Hork-Bajir lost his interest in me.
"Fool!" the human-Controller cried. "Visser Three will have your head for dinner!"
While they were busy panicking, I dropped Rachel into the water with the others.
Good work, Tobias, Jake said. Be careful up there, my friend.
You, too, I said. Good luck, you guys.
I could just barely see them, a small school of fish in the shallows. They swam off and
disappeared into deeper water.
71
As I've told you, there are limits to how far thought-speech can reach. We don't really know
what those limits are. But I wanted to stay as close to them as I dared, in case they needed
me. Not that there was much that I could do to help someone underwater.
I didn't want to stay right over them. I figured that would look suspicious to anyone on shore.
It was hard to figure out what to do. The monstrous bulk of the truck ship was overhead,
leaving only a few feet open above the surface of the water.
I decided I had to chance it. I flew under the ship, skimming the dappled water below and
practically scraping the metal belly of the ship above me.
It was a very difficult flight. I had to stay almost totally level. I couldn't rise or fall by more
than a couple of feet.
You guys still okay?
Tobias? I can't believe you can still thought-speak with that whole ship between us,
Rachel said.
I guess I could have told her the truth. That I was within a few feet of them. But then Jake
would have just gotten all mad and told me not to take stupid risks.
I figured that between the time it had taken through the entire morphing process, and carrying
them one at a time to the water, plus now the time spent swimming out to the big intake pipe,
Cassie had been in morph for just over half an hour. Jake had ten minutes more, then Marco
and Rachel.
What are you guys doing now? I asked.
We're looking at the bottom of this intake pipe. There's tremendous suction, Rachel
reported.
I'll go first and look around. See what's what, Jake announced. Here goes. Whoooaaaaa!
Man! Whooooaaa! Yah!
Jake! Jake, are you okay? Cassie cried.
Oh, yeah! What a rush! They should have a waterslide like that at The Gardens. It's like
being sucked up a straw by a giant.
Cool, Rachel said. I'm next.
No, let me look around first, Jake said. I seem to be in some kind of big tank. It's not very
deep. At least not yet. It's filling up. With these lame fish eyes I can't see beyond the surface
of the water very well. But I think up in the ceiling there's an opening. Like a grate or
something.
Up on the ceiling? How are we going to get up there? Marco asked.
72
Well, I think if they fill this whole tank, we'll be near the top eventually. We should be able
to morph to human, let ourselves out, then morph into something more dangerous than our
human bodies.
Excuse me, Marco said. But does anyone else ever stop to realize that some of the things
we talk about doing are totally INSANE?
What? Turning into fish, so we can be carried by a hawk and let ourselves be sucked up the
pipe of an alien spaceship, so that we can then turn into tigers and gorillas and whatever, and
overpower the creepy aliens? Rachel said. Is that what you mean by insane?
That's it exactly.
Yep, Rachel said. It is insane.
Well, okay, Marco said. As long as we all know we're nuts. Let's do it!
73
CHAPTER 23
There was nothing to do but wait. Wait while the water level inside the ship rose and carried
my friends toward the top of the chamber. Up to where the grate was.
I could not maintain my level flight beneath the ship any longer. I said good-bye to my
friends and zoomed out the far side. The open air was a blessing. I soared high on a nice
thermal pattern created by the ship itself. I rose high up and over the top of the ship.
The Park Rangers were all around on the ground. The helicopters and two of the Bug fighters
were still parked on the ground in the little clearing. The Blade ship was there, too.
Two other Bug fighters continued zipping around at treetop level.
While I watched, they brought the Hork-Bajir who had carelessly fired off the Dracon beam.
They dragged him before Visser Three.
We'd gotten so we thought of Hork-Bajir as these totally fearless, deadly monsters. But this
Hork-Bajir was not looking very brave. He collapsed on the ground before Visser Three. I
almost felt sorry for him.
It was one of the terrible things about our battle against the Yeerks. See, our enemy was just
the Yeerk slug that lived in the heads of Controllers. That Hork-Bajir may have been made a
Controller totally against his will. He had lost his freedom to the Yeerk in his head. Now, he
was about to lose his life, for something that he had no real control over.
I couldn't hear what was happening down on the ground. But I could see. My hawk's eyes
could see far too well.
I turned away. I won't tell you what was happening to the Hork-Bajir. That memory will be
my own private nightmare.
But when next I looked, the Hork-Bajir was gone. And in his place was a sudden rush of
other Hork-Bajir and Taxxons and humans, all surrounding Visser Three. The Visser looked
angry. He was pointing at the sky.
Within a few seconds, the helicopters were lifting off.
The two Bug fighters powered up and took off.
I had a very bad feeling that I knew what had happened. The doomed Hork-Bajir had told
Visser Three about the bird he had fired at. And some other Controller had probably said,
"Oh, yeah, I saw a bird acting suspiciously, too." And someone had no doubt said, "Hey,
wasn't it a bird that distracted the Hork-Bajir yesterday and let that human get away?"
Visser Three had put two and two together. An animal acting unlike an animal meant just one
thing to him: Andalites in a morph.
I guess I should have been flattered that Visser Three believed we Animorphs were true
Andalite warriors. But it didn't make any difference whether he thought I was an Andalite or
a human. He was sending his creatures into the sky. Looking for a bird that was no bird.
74
Me.
A Bug fighter skimmed over the trees. Its twin Dracon beams fired again and again in short,
sharp spears of burning light.
My heart was in my throat. They were killing every bird they saw!
The hawk! This was her territory.
But then, behind me, a helicopter! Thwak thwak thwak thwak! Ssshhhheewww!
A Dracon beam. A near miss. I couldn't get away. Between the Bug fighters and the
helicopters, they were too numerous, and too fast.
But there was one place no one was going to risk firing a Dracon beam. Not after what Visser
Three had just done to the careless Hork-Bajir.
I let go of the air beneath my wings and dropped. Down, down, down. Toward the vast truck
ship, spread below me like a steel meadow.
In an instant they were all on me. But the angles were wrong. I was too close to the ship.
They couldn't fire!
I landed on top of the hovering ship. I planted my talons on the hard, cold metal surface. It
stretched in every direction around me. The surface curved down and away from me so that I
couldn't even see the edges. It was as if I were standing all alone on a metal moon. Over my
head hovered helicopters and Bug fighters. I could see human and Hork-Bajir and Taxxon
eyes all focused on me.
I knew the look in their eyes. The look of the predator.
And me, their prey.
75
CHAPTER 24
It was not looking good for me. If I tried to fly off-that ship I would be Draconed ten
different ways before I could get away.
It was an eerie scene. I stood on the vast metal plain while over my head they hovered, a
swarm of deadly predators.
Then things got worse. A lot worse.
It floated up into my vision like a dark moon - the Blade ship of Visser Three.
It hovered just a few hundred feet up. I felt my last reserves of courage beginning to fail.
Tobias, old buddy, I said to myself, you are not going to get out of this alive.
But they just all hovered there. Slowly I began to realize the truth - they didn't know what to
do about me. They couldn't shoot me without hitting the ship.
Andalite!
The voice in my head made me reel. I almost took wing out of sheer fright.
He had never spoken directly to me before. It was a voice of such absolute power. Such utter
confidence. The mere silent sound of it in your head makes you want to obey. Makes you
quiver and fear. It is the voice of dread. The voice of destruction.
Andalite. Fool. Do you think I don't know what you are? A true bird would fly away.
Say nothing! I ordered myself. Nothing! If I tried to reply, he might know me for a human. I
would not tell him that. I would not give him anything.
I closed my mind. But I could not shut out that dark voice.
Give yourself up, Andalite. I will give you a quick and painless death. As soon as you tell
me where the others are.
I had seen what Visser Three did to the Hork-Bajir who displeased him. The memory was
fresh in my mind.
Have it your way, Andalite. I am patient. I can wait here for as long as it takes. And then
you will die. Quickly by Dracon beam. Or, perhaps, if we can snare you, more slowly here in
my Blade ship. Much more slowly.
Just then, I heard another voice in my head. A very different voice. It was faint. As if it were
far away.
Tobias? Tobias, can you hear me?
Rachel!
Yes, I can hear you!
76
Tobias! We're trapped! The tank is full, but the grate won't open. Cassie and Jake have
already morphed back to human, but they can't get it open. We're trapped in here!
Rachel! I... What can I do?
We can't get out, Rachel cried. Listen to me, Tobias. We're trapped. There is no way out.
This ship will take off soon. They'll find us when they get to the mother ship and unload the
water. Tobias? We... we don't want to be taken alive.
My blood ran cold. My head was whirling. What are you talking about?
Listen, Tobias, we can't be taken alive! Do you understand? If there's anything you can do.
.. anything!
Rachel! What can I do? I can't get you out of there!
I know, Rachel said. We all know. But if there's some way to... if the ship could be
destroyed. We know it's probably not possible. I... just if there was some way - 
No! No!
I have to morph to human. We'll tread water here. We have to be ready for when we get to
the mother ship. Then we'll morph into other animals and go down fighting.
This can't be happening, I cried. This can't be happening!
I guess Marco was right all along, Rachel said sadly. I guess it always was insane to
think we could fight the Yeerks.
Rachel... I never told you... 
You didn't have to, Tobias, she said. I knew. Good-bye.
She fell silent. In my mind I could picture her regaining her human shape. Treading water
with the others, unable to escape. Expecting only the worst. Praying that I might find a way
to make their end swift. As Visser Three had offered to make mine.
We had lost. The Yeerks had won, finally. And when we were gone, the last hope of the
human race would die.
Above me the Blade ship waited like... like a hawk watching a rabbit. Ready to swoop
down and finish me.
Only I wasn't a rabbit.
Visser Three was a predator? Well, so was I.
And I no longer had anything to be afraid of. If my friends were to die in the mother ship, I
would be lost and alone in a world where I belonged nowhere.
77
I had nothing more to lose.
Just then I saw something that should have terrified me. Across the metal plain of the ship
they crawled and slithered toward me. All around me. A dozen of them. Giant worms.
Centipedes with a hunger for living flesh.
Taxxons.
They had come from the inside of the ship on Visser Three's orders.
If I stayed put, they would catch me. If I flew, the hovering Yeerk ships would fry me.
The Taxxons closed the circle around me.
It looks as if you have run out of time, Visser Three said in my head. He laughed, ft was
not a nice laugh.
Ah, Visser Three, you ruthless predator, I thought Very clever. You have me trapped.
Trapped like a rabbit.
But a trapped rabbit is one thing. And a trapped hawk, a hawk with the mind of a human
being, is a whole different matter.
The nearest Taxxon leveled a hand-held Dracon beam at me. He watched me with two of the
circle of red globs they have for eyes.
I pushed off with my feet. I beat the air with my wings.
I flew straight for those red Jell-O eyes.
He raised one of his feeble forearms to shield his eyes. The wrong move! I trimmed a shade
right, raked my talons forward and struck like I was hitting a mouse in a field.
My talons closed around the Dracon beam. The Taxxon's weak grip was no match for my
speed.
The Dracon beam tore loose from his grip.
Get him! Visser Three cried. I could practically see the Blade ship rock from the force of
his rage.
But I did not take to the air. I flew fast but hugged the surface of the ship's metal curve. They
could not hit me without hitting their precious ship."
I knew just where I wanted to go. Wingtips actually hitting the ship on each downstroke, I
raced toward the ship's bridge. Toward the tiny windows where I had seen the Taxxon crew.
I could not save my friends, perhaps. But I could try to grant Rachel's last wish. I could try to
bring this ship down.
Even if it meant the end of my friends.
78
79
CHAPTER 25
Take off! Move! Visser Three commanded the crew of the truck ship.
Almost immediately, the huge thing began to move forward. Very slowly at first. But as it
moved, it created a headwind. The bridge was moving away from me. The ship was rising as
it went. A hundred feet up now. Two hundred!
Ha! Not so easy, Andalite!
Right then I had a powerful urge to shock the evil monster and say, Guess what, creep? Not
an Andalite at all. The name is Tobias!
But I wasn't ready to start bragging. The truth was, it was looking bad. The ship was slowly
picking up speed.
I flapped harder, harder. I gained again. But it was painfully slow. I was wearing out. The
Dracon beam weighed me down. The headwind was building.
Ahead of me, just a few feet away, I saw the bulge of the bridge.
I gained a foot. Another. Another.
I landed and folded my wings. I couldn't fly any more. But I could still pull myself along with
my talons, gripping the small edges and ridges that ran along the top of the ship's bridge.
I was there! Below me, transparent plastic. I could see the crew on the bridge. Taxxons stared
wildly up at me.
With one desperate lunge I propelled myself into the air. I had to fly full force to stay ahead
of the onrushing windows of the bridge.
Then, with one sharp talon, I pulled the trigger on the Dracon beam.
Fry, you worms!
There was no recoil. Not like a regular gun at all.
But a beam of intense red light lanced from me to the bridge. It burned a hole through the
window, sliced through a fat Taxxon, and began slicing up control panels and instruments
like a hot knife going through butter. I squeezed that trigger for as long as I could.
At last, exhausted, I could do no more.
The Dracon beam slipped from my talon and plunged toward the earth below.
But I had done it.
It was an incredible and terrible thing to see. The ship, big as a skyscraper, vast beyond
belief, shuddered as though it had hit a speed bump.
80
Still it rose, sharply upward into the sky, as if it were a whale breaching. It aimed for space,
its natural home. But it was clear that it was no longer under control. It rolled suddenly onto
its side.
BOOM! A ball of orange flame!
The out-of-control ship had smashed recklessly into one of the helicopters. The chopper fell
in ruins.
The Bug fighters and the Blade ship scurried quickly out of the way. But too late.
KA-RUNCH! BA-BOOM!
One of the Bug fighters had slammed into the side of the ship. The Bug fighter was finished.
The Blade ship and the remaining Bug fighter withdrew quickly.
And then I saw the hole.
A tear a hundred feet long had been opened in the side of the truck ship. From the hole, the
water of the lake gushed. It was a waterfall from the sky. Millions of gallons hemorrhaging
out.
Oh, boy, I whispered.
We were maybe seven hundred feet up over the forest now, when I saw them.
Cassie first. Then Rachel and Marco together. And Jake. They fell, fully human, from the
torn side of the ship.
They plummeted, helpless, doomed, to the uprushing ground!
Noooo!
I knew there was nothing I could do. I knew it. But still I hurtled after them. Hurtled with all
my speed to them as they fell, arms flailing, mouths open in screams of terror.
81
CHAPTER 26
They fell.
But as they fell, they began to change.
Cassie was the first. Feathers sprouted from her skin. One of her morphs was an osprey. A
distant cousin of the red-tails.
She fell, and as she fell, she became less and less of a human.
Marco and Rachel had both previously morphed bald eagles. Bald eagles are huge birds,
much
bigger than red-tailed hawks.
As I watched, long wings replaced their flailing arms.
Jake had morphed a peregrine falcon. Peregrines are so fast they make red-tails look like they
are standing still.
As I watched, a peregrine's beak grew from Jake's mouth.
Not enough time. Not enough time! They would hit the ground before -
Shwoooop!
Cassie opened her wings and skimmed above the treetops. Marco barely made it. He fell
down into the forest, out of sight. I was sure he had been too late.
But then, up from the trees floated a bird with a six-foot wingspread and a proud white head.
YES! I cried.
In the sky overhead, the huge truck ship stopped climbing. It rolled again, onto its back this
time, and plunged back to Earth.
Man, that was WAY too close! I heard Marco yell. That does it. I have had it with this
Animorphs stuff!
You're not safe yet! I told him. Look!
With the truck ship out of the way and falling to Earth, the Blade ship and the Bug fighters
came after us.
Quick! Into the trees! Out of sight! I yelled.
Like a well-trained fighter squadron, we swooped down into the forest. Down below the tops
of the trees, where the Yeerks could no longer see us.
BOOOOOM!
An explosion like a bomb going off. The truck ship had hit the ground.
82
The concussion rolled us over like a tidal wave of air.
I rocketed into a tree, but was able to avoid being hurt. Everyone okay? I yelled.
One by one they said yes.
But the explosion had disturbed every animal in the forest. The birds had all either hidden or
flown away during the earlier fighting. Those few birds still left now took wing, startled.
I saw her take off. The hawk. She was scared and wanted to run to the sky.
But the sky was not a sanctuary for her.
I don't know which ship fired the Dracon beam. Whether it was one of the Bug fighters, or
the Blade ship.
You see, they'd had a good long look at me. And she looked just like me.
The Dracon beam sizzled. It burned off a wing.
And she fell to Earth, never to fly again.
83
CHAPTER 27
The Yeerk truck ship burned. What was left was eliminated by the Yeerks. No evidence was
left behind. No proof that we could show to the world.
But we had destroyed it. And a Bug fighter as well. And we had gotten out alive.
Most of us.
It was a day later when I went to see Rachel again. It was like she was expecting me.
"Hi, Tobias," she said. "Come in. It's safe."
I hopped through the window and fluttered over to the dresser.
"How are you doing?" she asked.
I'm okay, I said.
She looked unsure of what to say next. "Look, um, Tobias... maybe this seems crazy. But
Cassie and I were thinking, you know, that maybe we'd go back up to the lake. Try and find.
.. her body. The hawk. You know, and at least bury her."
No, that doesn't sound crazy, Rachel, I said softly. Not crazy at all. Just human.
She looked keenly at me. "Well, we are human. All of us."
Yes. I knew I was human when I realized how... how sad I was that she was killed. See, a
hawk wouldn't care. If she had been my mate, I would have missed her, been disturbed. But
sadness? That's a human emotion. I know it seems strange, but I guess only a human would
really care that a bird had died.
"If you helped us look, maybe we could still find her body."
No. Her body will be eaten. By a raccoon, or a wolf, or another bird. Maybe even another
hawk. That's the way it is.
"That's the way it is for wild animals, Tobias. Not humans."
Yeah. I know. That's how I know that you are wrong, Rachel, at least partly. I am a human,
yes. But I am also a hawk. I'm a predator who kills for food. And I'm also a human being who
... who grieves, over death.
She looked terribly sad. She's very human, my friend Rachel.
I went to the window. It was a beautiful day outside. The sun was bright. The cumulus clouds
advertised the thermals that would carry me effortlessly to the sky.
I flew.
I am Tobias. A boy. A hawk. Some strange mix of the two.
84
You know now why I can't tell you my last name. Or where I live. But someday you may
look up in the sky and see the silhouette of a large bird of prey. Some large bird with a
rending beak and sharp, tearing talons. Some bird with vast wings outstretched to ride the
thermals.
Be happy for me, and for all who fly free.




Chapter 1
M y name is Cassie.
I can't tell you my last name. I wish I could. But I can't even tell you what town I live in or
what state. We have to disguise our identities, we Animorphs. It's not about being shy. It's
about staying alive.
If the Yeerks ever learn who we are, we'll be done for. If they don't kill us outright, they'll
make us Controllers. They'll force a Yeerk slug into our brains, where it will take control of
us, making us slaves - tools of the Yeerk invasion of Earth.
And I really don't like the idea of being under the control of an alien. I don't like the idea of
being dead, either.
On the other hand, there are some things I do like about being an Animorph. Some very cool
things.
Take the other night. It was late. I should have been in bed. Instead I was in the barn, get ting
ready to turn into a squirrel.
Technically, the barn is really the Wildlife Re habilitation Clinic. My dad is a vet. So is my
mom, but she works at The Gardens, this big zoo. The Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic is just
my dad and me. We take in injured birds and animals and try to save them, then release them
back into their natural habitats.
That's where I was. In the barn. Surrounded by dozens of cages full of birds, from a mourning
dove who'd run into a car windshield to a golden eagle who'd almost been electrocuted by a
power line.
In another part of the barn we have bigger cages for the badgers and opossums and skunks
and deer and even a pair of wolves who'd been poisoned. At the other end (far from the
wolves) we keep our own horses.
There's an operating room and a couple of small recovery rooms, too.
Back to that night. Have you ever watched a squirrel in the park? They are constantly alert.
Constantly looking around. It's like every minute of every day they're thinking, "Hey! What's
that?"
So I knew that if I morphed into a squirrel, all that nervousness and fear would become a part
of me. It's something we've all had to deal with: controlling the animal instincts, the animal
mind that comes along with the animal body.
Anyway, that's where I was, in a gloomy barn with just the yellow overhead bulbs to light the
room. Why was I there? Because someone, or something, had been sneaking in and getting at
the birds. We'd lost a patient just the night before. A duck.
And because I couldn't sleep, anyway. I kept having these dreams. Only they weren't like
normal dreams, somehow. More like... I don't know. Just really strange, that's all.
3
"Relax, Magilla," I whispered to the squirrel in my hands. "This won't hurt at all." I pulled
some chestnuts from my pocket and handed him one. Another nut fell to the floor.
Some morphs are easy. Some are terrifying. When I was a horse, that was cool. When I had
to become a trout, well, that was a little more weird. The whole time I just kept thinking how
someone could fry me and serve me with tartar sauce.
And I don't like tartar sauce.
"Squirrel," I told myself. I always try to get into the feeling of what it might be like to be the
animal before I even start morphing.
The first physical change was in my size. I started shrinking. It's a very bizarre feeling. See,
you feel like you're standing totally still, but the ground keeps coming up toward you. And
the ceiling is moving away. Door handles aren't where they should be anymore. All of a
sudden they're over your head.
I had shrunk to maybe two, two-and-a-half feet tall when my arms came sucking back into
my body. Right about that point, the real Magilla tore out of there. He ran back to his cage,
got in, and - I swear this is true - closed the door. Anyway, I still had normal (although short)
legs, but my arms were stunted. I still had the normal number of fingers, but they were teeny
tiny now, way too small for my body.
My ears traveled up the side of my head to rest on top. Soft gray fur spread across my body
in a wave. My face puffed out and grew pointed.
Then, the wildest thing! My tail sprouted out of my body! And what was cool was that I
wasn't a squirrel yet. I was still about half human, the size of a small child, and my tail just
shot out, about two feet long! Much longer and bigger than it would be once I was totally
squirrelified.
I tilted my head back and I could see this bushy gray tail arched up over me. Way cool.
My legs sucked in and I was down on the ground, down on the cement floor of the barn.
I suddenly discovered I hadn't swept and mopped as well as I thought I had. Amazing what
you can see when your face is just an inch from the floor.
Then the squirrel brain kicked in.
WHOA! YOW!
Man, did I have energy!
It was like I was plugged into a million volts. I was supercharged! My slow, sluggish human
brain was just blown away by the sudden explosion of energy.
A noise!
What's that? I cocked my ears. I swung my head, focusing my big eyes. A bird in a cage!
4
A new sound! What was it? I spun around.
No, wait! What was that? And that? And the other sound?
PREDATORS! They were everywhere! I was surrounded! PREDATORS!
5
Chapter 2
Birds! Big birds with nasty claws. All around me.
Wait. There was a nut. Oooh. A nut.
PREDATORS! Alert!
I scampered across the floor. Look left. Look right. Sniff sniff sniff the air.
Oh, yes. Predators. I smelled them. I heard them. Birds. A wolf. A badger.
PREDATORS! RUN RUN RUN!
Oh, wait. Was that a nut? I hopped over to the nut. YES! A chestnut! I seized it in my little
front claws and began immediately to chew a hole in it. Excellent! Wonderful! Chestnut! And
I had it! No one could take it away. Hah hah!
A noise! What?
PREDATORS!
Don't drop the nut! Run with the nut! RUN!
With the nut stuffed into my jaw, I ran.
I ran straight up the wall. Straight up.
And that was the moment when Tobias decided to show up.
Tobias flew in through the hayloft overhead.
Unfortunately, in my squirrel mentality, with my human brain just barely holding on, I didn't
realize it was Tobias.
What it looked like to me was a red-tailed hawk. A bird of prey. And this one was not in a
cage.
No, this one was flapping around the high rafters of the barn. The hawk had talons like steel
and a hooked beak that could open me up like a can of beans.
I felt his hawk's eyes on me.
RUN RUNRUNRUNRUN!
I didn't know what to do. I mean, me, the human being named Cassie. I didn't know what to
do. I knew I had to get control over the squirrel. But it was so hyper!
However, the squirrel knew just what to do.
ZOOOM!
6
I ran straight up the wall. My little claws grabbed at tiny splinters and cracks in the wood,
and shot up at a terrifying speed. If you've never been a squirrel - and let's face it, you haven't
- you probably don't have any idea what it's like to run up. The wooden wall was like a floor
under me. But at the same time I knew the difference between up and down. I knew if I fell it
would be down. It's as if you were running across the floor in your house, but if you tripped
you'd fall back against the wall.
Very strange.
Tobias had come to rest on a rafter. But I could feel his eyes on me. I froze. I froze
completely. Not even my tail twitched. I just clutched onto the wall and froze.
But I couldn't keep it up. That torrent of squirrel energy would not let me stand still for long.
Suddenly, with barely a glance to the side, I launched myself through space. I flew. I mean, I
just jumped and hurtled through the air for what seemed like half a mile, but was actually just
ten feet.
SLAM! I landed on the wooden beam that runs above the horse stalls.
Bad move. Tobias had seen my movement. Out of the corner of my eye I saw his vast wings
open. He swooped down, talons raked forward.
But then... a new movement. Something large and furtive. A board in the side of the barn
pushed open. A head poked inside. It was just below me. An intelligent, alert face, looking up
at me and wondering if I was dinner.
A fox! Aha! My mystery bird-killer.
I had to get control of the squirrel brain. It al ways takes a minute in any new morph, at least,
to control those wild animal instincts, but I didn't have a minute.
Tobias swooped.
Suddenly it was insanity everywhere. Birds in every cage began to squawk and shriek! The
wolves in the next room decided to start howling. The horses were whinnying shrilly.
Tobias sheered away, startled.
Too late. I had jumped again, and now I was falling toward the straw-covered floor of a stall.
Fall ing toward the fox.
I hit the ground and blew out of there, leaving a storm of dust and straw in my wake.
The fox came after me. He was fast. Very fast.
Tobias! Help! I yelled in thought-speak.
What the... Is that you, Cassie?
I dodged left. The fox dodged after me.
7
He was faster than me and almost as agile. Unless I could find a place to climb up and away,
I was done for!
Yes, it's me!
Well, why didn't you tell me?! he said, sounding grumpy in my head. l was considering
eating you.
l just morphed. I just got control of this crazy squirrel brain. Now would you PLEASE save
me?
The fox's jaw snapped at my tail. I felt his teeth comb the fur.
Good grief, Tobias said. He opened his wings and came hurtling down, straight at the fox.
The fox saw the shadow of the big hawk. He stopped dead in his tracks.
Too late. Tobias raked him with his talons and shot past.
The fox decided this was more trouble than he needed. He bolted for his secret passageway.
Tobias came to rest on a crossbeam and looked down at me with his fierce hawk's gaze.
Cassie? Why are you out here at midnight turning into a squirrel?
I was already starting to morph back to human shape. Well, we've had some birds taken in
the last couple of days. We figured it was a badger or a raccoon or a fox, but we couldn't
figure out how he was getting in. So I decided to morph and wait to see when he showed up.
Well, I certainly can't criticize anyone who wants to rescue birds, he said. He fluffed his
wings and began preening some ruffled feathers.
I was halfway back to human shape, growing up from the floor, feeling my legs sprout
beneath me. But my human mouth was not back yet. So, what are you doing here, Tobias?
Looking for a squirrel sandwich?
Tobias had almost completely accepted the fact that he was permanently stuck in the body of
a red-tailed hawk. Recently he had begun to hunt and eat like a hawk. He was still a little
sensitive about it, but I thought if I just made a joke out of it, he would realize I wasn't
grossed out or any thing.
Squirrel sandwich? he said. No, I was thinking barbecue. Sorry I scared you.
"It's okay, my friend," I said in my own voice. My mouth had formed. I was almost back to
normal, all but this huge tail, which was still poking out of the back of my morphing outfit.
Normal, for me, is about average height, I guess. Whatever "average" is. I'm kind of solidly
built, not skinny and not fat, with hair I keep short because I don't like messing with it. As my
friends would tell you, I'm not exactly Ms. Fashion. Mostly, if you want to know what I look
like, picture a girl in overalls and leather work gloves, biting her lip as she concentrates on
trying to force a pill down the throat of a badger.
8
Jake once took a picture of me doing exactly that. He has it next to his computer in his room.
Don't ask me why. I would be glad to give him a picture of me in a dress or something.
Rachel could loan me the dress. But Jake says he likes the picture he has.
l hear something, Tobias said, suddenly alert.
I strained my ears. Human ears are so lame. Almost any animal can hear better. But then I
heard it, too. A voice.
"Is someone in there?"
"My father!"
You still have a tail!
Too late. The barn door swung open. My fa ther stood there, blinking sleepily and holding a
flashlight. "Cass? What are you doing out here?"
I stuck my hands behind my back and tried to hold my big squirrel tail down while I
attempted to morph it away at maximum speed. "N-n-noth- ing, Dad. I-I-I just couldn't sleep.
"
He nodded. "Okay. Well, go to bed now," he said crankily. My father is one of those people
who needs about an hour and three cups of coffee to wake up.
"Okay, Daddy," I said.
He hesitated. "Cassie? Turn around."
"Turn around?" I repeated in a squeaky voice.
"Yeah. Turn around. It's... just turn around."
Slowly I turned. As I did, the last of the tail shwooped back into my spine.
"Huh," my dad said. "I gotta get back to sleep. I swear I thought you had a tail."
"Heh heh," I laughed weakly.
When he left I collapsed back on the straw. "I really should have just stayed in bed," I said to
Tobias. "Dreams or no dreams."
Dreams? he snapped. What kind of dreams?
I shrugged. "I don't know. These kind of weird dreams about the sea."
The sea, he echoed. And a voice, calling out to you from beneath the water.
It was warm in the barn, but suddenly I felt really cold.
9
Chapter 3
N o, I haven't had any weird dreams about the sea," Marco said. "I've had weird dreams about
my sheets trying to strangle me. I've had weird dreams about falling from way up high and
when I finally land I'm in Mister Rogers' Neighborhood talking to King Friday. I've had
weird dreams about that woman on Baywatch... hmm, well, that does kind of involve the
ocean, I guess."
"You have dreams about King Friday?" Rachel asked him. She put on a worried look. "I see."
She shook her head slowly and made a tsk, tsk sound.
"What? What's the matter with dreaming about King Friday?" Marco demanded.
Rachel shrugged. "All I'm going to say is you should think about seeing a counselor before
your condition worsens." Rachel turned so Marco couldn't see her and gave me a wink.
"Very funny," Marco sneered. But he still looked a little worried.
We were in Rachel's room the next day, af ter school. Her room is so neat. Straight out of a
magazine, you know? Like everything matches or goes together. She has this bulletin board
where she puts little wise sayings on Post-it notes.
I drifted over to the bulletin board and read '"Don't think there are no crocodiles just be cause
the water is calm.' - Malayan Proverb."
Just beside that was '"If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the results
of a hundred battles.' - Sun Tzu."
It made me a little sad. In the good old days, Rachel would have had a bunch of quotes about
being a good person or whatever. It just showed how much our lives had changed.
In a very short time we had all grown accustomed to a world of fear and danger. We had
arrived at Rachel's house separately. We had each checked to make sure we weren't being
followed. We had planned the afternoon in advance to be sure that Rachel's mom and her two
sisters would be out. We had even had Tobias fly over the area looking for anything unusual.
That's what our lives had become. That and quotations full of paranoia and battle.
Jake hadn't said anything yet. Tobias and I had both told everyone about our strangely iden
tical dreams. About the voice that seemed to come from beneath the sea. The strange voice
that called to us.
No one else had heard the voice in their dreams. Marco had made jokes. Rachel had been
supportive but skeptical. Only Jake had remained silent.
I suppose you could say Jake is sort of our "leader," although he's not bossy in any way. It's
more like this natural aspect of his personality. He's the one you just automatically look to
when there's trouble.
Of course, I look to him for other reasons. Not that I would ever tell him or anything, but I
really like Jake. You know, as in like.
10
He's very cute, in a big, strong kind of way. He has brown hair and dark, dark eyes. He seems
very serious until you get to know him. And then you realize he's still pretty serious, but he
also knows when to laugh.
Jake has to know when to laugh because Marco has been his best friend since they were both
in diapers. They've competed and foughtand disagreed the whole time. Marco's mission in
life is to find the humor in everything. Even in his best friend.
Marco is kind of cute, too, although he's not my type. He wears his brown hair long and has
these amazing eyelashes that I would love to have myself.
Marco isn't interested in being in charge, or even in being part of a team. He wants us to just
quit the whole thing. He wants us to forget the Yeerks and forget morphing and just try and
stay alive.
But at the same time, it's Marco who is very aware of all the security problems. He's the one
who makes sure we never discuss anything on the phone, where enemy ears might be
listening in.
Rachel is my closest friend. She has been for years. How can I explain Rachel? First of all,
she and Jake are cousins, and they have a lot in common. They seem to grow strong people in
that family, because Rachel is the strongest person I know. It's like nothing ever intimidates
her. She's totally fearless, or at least that's how she seems.
To look at her you'd think, Oh, she'll grow up to be some airheaded model, because she's very
tall and pretty and blond. But I pity anyone who mistakes Rachel for a wimpy airhead.
Sometimes I think Rachel likes the way everything has worked out. It's like all along there
was this Amazon warrior locked up inside of her, and now she has an excuse to bring it out.
But she was not a person who believed in dreams very much. "Well, okay," she said, "if we're
done with the dreams, let's - "
"Rachel," Jake interrupted, "I think I have something that may be interesting." He pulled a
videocassette out of his bag.
"Cool. Let's watch a movie," Marco said.
"Not a movie," Jake said. "I guess no one else watched the late news last night?"
"I was busy watching my taped reruns of Mis ter Rogers' Neighborhood," Marco said, giving
Rachel a sly look. "Last night it was the one where it was a beautiful day in the
neighborhood."
Jake rolled his eyes up to the ceiling, the way he'd done a million times before when Marco
said something irrelevant or annoying. "Rachel, can we go downstairs and use your VCR?"
"Sure," Rachel said.
We trooped down the stairs. Except for Tobias, who fluttered down above our heads.
11
"Hey, Tobias," Marco said, "I've been mean ing to ask you, are hawks like seagulls? I mean,
do they poop while they're flying?"
Depends on who's down below, Tobias shot back. Let me just put it this way - if you get
on my nerves, you'd better buy a hat.
Down in Rachel's living room, Jake turned on the TV and popped in his cassette.
"There was just this one small story," he narrated, as, on the screen, an old guy in a bathing
suit held up a piece of what looked like metal.
"So now we're interested in hairy old guys who should be wearing shirts?" Marco asked.
"This old guy says he found that on the beach. It washed up during the storm a couple of days
ago. Watch."
The camera focused on what looked like a jagged piece of metal, about two feet long and one
foot wide. As the camera zoomed in, I saw what looked like letters. Only they weren't any
alphabet I had ever seen.
Now the tape was showing the anchorwoman smiling, and then it went blank. Jake turned the
VCR off.
"Okay... so?" Marco prodded.
Jake sighed. "So the night the Andalite landed, when I went inside his ship to get the cube
that gave us our morphing powers, I saw writing."
I felt a chill creep up the back of my neck.
"I could be wrong, I mean, I'm not some expert," Jake said. "But I think it was that same
alphabet. Those same kinds of letters."
Suddenly no one was laughing. Not even Marco.
"I think what washed up on the beach is a piece of an Andalite ship," Jake said.
Suddenly, without warning, I felt the ground swirl beneath me. I fell straight back, not even
caring that Jake caught me in his arms just before I hit the carpet.
12
Chapter 4
I was falling, falling, falling.
Falling into the sea.
Splash! I hit the water. But still I fell. Down and down and down through blue-green, sunlit
layers of water.
I 'm here, a voice called to me. l am here. I cannot survive much longer. If you hear me...
come. If you hear me... come.
Suddenly I opened my eyes. I stared up at Jake's concerned face.
Glancing across the room, I saw Rachel with the telephone to her ear, preparing to dial.
"She's awake!" Jake said.
"I'd better still call an ambulance," Rachel said.
"No!" Marco snapped, "Not unless we know she's hurt. It's too big a risk."
Rachel's eyes flared the way they do when someone tells her something she doesn't want to
hear. "I'm calling nine-one-one," she said tersely.
"No, Rachel, I'm okay," I said. I sat up. My head felt a little woozy, but I was all right.
Rachel hesitated, her fingers just above the keypad. "What about Tobias?"
I looked around the room and saw Tobias spread out on the floor, one wing crumpled beneath
him.
He looked dead.
I jumped up and ran to him.
"Rachel, Cassie seems okay, and nine-one-one can't help Tobias," Jake said.
Rachel replaced the receiver and ran over to Tobias.
"He's not dead," I said. I could feel him breathing. Then, just as suddenly as I had, he woke
up. His enormous brown hawk's eyes opened, instantly fierce.
His first reaction was pure hawk. He hopped up and flared. Hawks flare just the way cats do
when they're trying to intimidate someone. They hunch their shoulders and fluff up their
feathers to make themselves look bigger than they are.
"Everybody stand still," I said quickly. "It's okay, Tobias, you were just out for a minute
there."
He quickly gained control over the hawk instincts. That was strange, he said.
13
"It happened to me, too," I said. "I passed out. And then I had the dream again. Only this time
I could hear an actual voice. Or at least I heard thought-speech."
Me, too, Tobias confirmed.
"Okay, now this is getting weird," Rachel said. "Because at the same time I thought I kind of
felt something."
"Yeah," Jake agreed. Marco nodded.
l know this sounds crazy, but... but it's like someone is sending out a distress signal. Like
they are calling for help.
"Only this someone is in the water, or under the water, or something," I said. "Seeing that
video, seeing that writing, it was like suddenly the message grew stronger."
"Or it may have just been a coincidence," Jake said. "This isn't a dream. I don't know what it
is, but it isn't a dream. Even I halfway saw something. This is some kind of a communication.
"
"Well, this is all very interesting," Marco said, "but so what? I mean, are we getting some
kind of psychic message from the Little Mermaid? What are we supposed to do about it?"
Jake looked closely at me. "Cassie? Was the voice in your dream a human voice?"
I was startled by the question. I hadn't really thought about it. I actually laughed. "When you
asked me, the first thing that popped into my head was no, it isn't human." I laughed again.
"But that doesn't make any sense."
It's not human, Tobias said suddenly. l understand the meaning of what it's saying, but it's
not human. It's not 'speaking' in words, really.
"So what is it?" Rachel asked. "Yeerk?"
I let my mind drift back to the dream. I tried to hear the sound in my head again. "No, not
Yeerk. It reminds me of something... of some one."
The Andalite, Tobias blurted.
I snapped my fingers. "Yes! That's it! It re minds me of the Andalite. When he first thoughtspoke
to us. That's what it's like."
"The Andalite," Marco muttered. He looked away. I knew he was remembering. We all were.
We had been walking home from the mall at night. Walking through a big abandoned
construction site, when the Andalite ship had ap peared above us.
It landed, and out came the Andalite prince, fatally wounded in a battle with the Yeerks some
where in space.
14
He was the one who had warned us of the Yeerks - the parasite species that inhabited the
brains of other creatures and enslaved them, making them Controllers. It was the Andalite
who had warned us, and who, in desperation, had given us the great and terrible weapon - the
power to
morph.
We had been hiding, cringing in terror, when the Yeerks caught up with the Andalite. When
Visser Three himself, the Yeerk leader, had murdered im.
I shuddered at the terrible memory of the An- dalite's last, despairing ry.
"Yes," I whispered. "Tobias is right. It's an Andalite. That's who is alling to us from the sea.
An Andalite."
For a few minutes no one said anything.
Then Rachel said, "He died trying to save us." She looked defiantly at Marco. "I know that
doesn't mean anything to you. But the Andalite died trying to save Earth."
Marco nodded. "I know. And you're wrong, Rachel. That means plenty to me."
"Yeah? Well, if there's some Andalite calling for help, I'm going to try and help him," Rachel
said.
I looked over at Jake and we shared this look, like "Oh, big surprise, Rachel is ready to go." I
hid my smile and Jake kept a straight face.
"Tobias?" Jake asked. "What do you say?"
l don't know if I should have a vote. I'm the one person here who isn't going to be much help
dealing with water. Besides, you guys all know how I'd vote.
Of all of us, it was Tobias who had stayed longest at the Andalite's side, even as the Andalite
ordered him to get to safety. Something really deep had gone on between the Andalite prince
and Tobias.
It was my turn. "I can't just ignore someone crying out for help, if that's what this is."
We all looked at Marco. I could see Rachel getting angry, like she was ready to jump all over
Marco if, as usual, he disagreed.
Marco just grinned. "I really hate to do this. I really hate to disappoint you all." Then he grew
serious. "But I was there at the construction site, same as all of you. I was there when Visser
Three - " Suddenly his voice choked. "What I mean is, if there's an Andalite who needs any
thing, I'm there."
15
Chapter 5
You do realize that if we're down here at the beach because of that news story, some
Controllers are probably down here, too?" Marco asked for about the tenth time.
"Yes, Marco," Jake said patiently. "But maybe Cassie and Tobias can get some feeling from
being down here, closer to the sea."
"So let me get this straight - we are now making decisions based on Tobias and Cassie's
dreams, right?" Marco said. "And yet my dreams are totally ignored. The fact that I once
dreamed about staying home and watching TV in total safety, that means nothing, right?"
"Right," Jake said flatly.
We were at the beach. The same beach where the guy on the news had found what we now
believed was a piece of an Andalite ship. It was night, with a sliver of moon that painted
ripples of silver across the black water. A salt breeze blew off the water, making me feel
peaceful and yet a little overwhelmed, intimidated, the way the ocean always makes me feel.
There is nothing as big as the ocean. It's like this entirely different planet, full of strange
plants and fantastic animals. Valleys and mountains and caves and broad, flat plains, all
hidden from our sight.
All I could see was the surface. All I could feel was the barest edge of the ocean, rushing
over my toes as each wave crashed ashore.
But I could sense it out there. I could sense how vast it was, and how tiny I was.
"How about my dream of living long enough to get a driver's license?"
Jake gave Marco an exasperated look. "Marco, you can turn into a bird and fly. You could do
it right now. Why would you care about driving a car a few years from now?"
"The babes," Marco said instantly. "Duh. You can't pick up girls when you're a bird." He
glanced overhead, where we could see just the hint of dark wings against the canopy of stars.
"No offense, Tobias. The wings are great, but I'm thinking of something bright red with about
four hundred horsepower."
Marco's cooperative mood hadn't lasted long. I knew it wouldn't. Marco is never happy
unless he's complaining about something. Just like Rachel is never happy unless she has
something to fight against. And Tobias is never happy, period. He thinks if he's ever happy,
someone will just come along and take his happiness away.
"So, Cassie?" Rachel said. "Do you feel any thing?"
"Well, I feel a little embarrassed," I admitted. "And a little foolish."
"Maybe we could try calling the Psychic Friends," Marco suggested. "Hi, is this Psychic
Friends? I've been dreaming about aliens lately - "
16
"Why Cassie and Tobias?" Rachel wondered aloud, ignoring Marco. "Why would they get
these images so clearly and the rest of us barely felt
anything?"
Jake shook his head. "I don't know. I mean, okay, say you're an Andalite. And you want to
call for help. Who do you want to come and rescue you? Other Andalites, obviously."
"Tobias isn't an Andalite, and neither am I," I pointed out.
"I know," Jake said. "But maybe this communication, whatever it is, is tied into the ability to
morph. You know, like morphing ability makes you able to 'hear' it. That way, only Andalites
would be able to receive the call for help."
"Which still doesn't explain why Tobias and I _"
"Maybe it does," Marco interrupted, serious again. "Look, Tobias is permanently in morph.
And Cassie, you're the one who has the most talent for morphing." Then he flashed white
teeth in the dark. "Besides, you know you like animals more than humans, so it's like you're
halfway into morph, anyway."
Suddenly a dark shape swooped low over our heads. Lights! Tobias said. Up ahead on
the beach. There's a bunch of people moving in a line with flashlights, like they're searching
for something. You can't see them yet because they're hidden by that dune. But they'll be here
in a couple of minutes.
"Who are they?" Jake demanded.
l can't tell, Tobias said. My eyes may be great during the day, but at night I don't see any
better than you do. I'm a hawk, not an owl. Fortunately, I still hear pretty well. You guys hide
in the dunes. I'll be right back.
With that he was gone.
"Come on," Jake said. "He's right. Let's hide in the dunes."
We crouched down in a pocket between two dunes. I lay flat on my belly in the cold sand and
peered through the tall sea grass, focusing on the bright line of the surf.
Tobias was back a few minutes later.
 It's them, he said. He came to rest on a piece of driftwood.  It's a group from The
Sharing. Chapman is with them. He turned his head to look at Jake. Tom is with them,
too.
The Sharing is a front organization for the Yeerks. Supposedly it's this group for all ages, like
Girl Scouts or whatever. In reality it's a way for the Controllers to try and recruit new
voluntary hosts. As impossible as it may seem, some humans actually decide to become hosts
for the Yeerks. The Yeerks like it that way. It's easier for them to have a voluntary host
instead of a host that resists their control.
17
The Sharing is very subtle, of course. People are brought along very slowly, over time. New
members have no idea what it's all about at first. They think it's just fun and games.
I don't know when they tell the members what's really happening. By then I guess it's too late.
They either become hosts voluntarily, or, like Jake's brother Tom, they are taken, anyway.
"Tom is with them?" Jake asked.
 I'm pretty sure, Tobias said. Some of the senior members - Chapman and Tom - are
following behind the others. I could hear some of what they were saying. They're very
worried about that fragment of Andalite ship.
"So it is Andalite?" Rachel asked, excited.
l guess so, Tobias said. l heard something else, too.
The way he hesitated made me tense up. "What?"
Something about Visser Three having visions. That's what they said. Visions. I guess the
visions made the Visser cranky. He was on the mother ship at the time and decided to shove a
Hork-Bajir out of an airlock because he broke the Visser's concentration.
"It's because of Visser Three's Andalite body," Marco said.
"That's the connection. These dreams or visions or whatever they are must be some kind of
communication that's only supposed to be heard by Andalites."
Suddenly I saw the line of flashlights swing into view. There must have been twenty people
strung across the beach, all looking down at the sand, moving forward slowly.
"They're searching for any other fragments," I whispered.
A part of the line stopped moving. I heard someone yelling. Others came running up, ex
cited.
"What did they find?" Jake wondered.
"I don't..." Then, in a flash, it came to me. "Our footprints! Four sets of fresh footprints that
suddenly turn off into the dunes!"
"Let's get out of here," Jake hissed. "Now!"
Too late!
The flashlight beams raced across the rippling sand and up the side of the dune. In an instant
a dozen flashlight beams focused on the notch where we crouched.
We slithered back, down and out of sight. Then we jumped up and ran.
"We should morph!" Rachel gasped as we stumbled over the sinking sand.
18
"No!" Marco said. "Tracks. We would leave tracks that went from human to
animal."
"Get them!" someone yelled. Chapman, I think. He's our assistant principal at school. I knew
his voice from hearing him yell in the hall ways.
Jerky, wild beams of light danced all around us. We ducked and ran as fast as we could. But
running across the sand was like running through quicksand.
Jake was gasping out whispered instructions. "Double around... if they follow us deeper into
... the dunes... we can double around... get to the water... then morph..."
"There! There! I see them!"
A beam of light swept over me. I could see my shadow, long and twisted, projected on the
sand. I dodged left, out of the light. Just in time.
BAM! BAM!
Gunfire!
Someone was shooting at me.
19
Chapter 6
It seemed totally crazy.
I mean, I've been in one-on-one combat to the death with seven-foot-tall Hork-Bajir war
riors, and I've been shot at by Dracon beams that sort of disintegrate you slowly. But I'd
never been shot at with plain old everyday guns.
It seemed nuts after all we'd been through.
BAM!BAM!BAM!
Phit! I heard something hit the sand just inches from my foot.
"Aaaahhh!" I cried in surprise.
This was real. Real! This was really happen ing.
A rough hand grabbed me and dragged me forward. Jake. I had frozen when I'd heard the
bullet so close.
They're all in the dunes! Tobias cried. Now's the time.
"Come on!" Jake snapped. He half dragged me up the side of the nearest dune, but by then I
was moving fine all on my own. I was scurrying up the side of that hill, snatching at
handholds of scrub grass, pistoning my feet into the sand.
Over the top. We slid and rolled and ran down the far side.
We were back on the beach. I stole a quick glance to the right. No lights on the beach. They
were all in the dunes. Looking for us.
"Head to the water," Jake said. "Morph to fish."
"Jake," I panted. "Trout... they're freshwater fish... this is saltwater."
"You have a better idea?" he asked.
BAM!BAM!
"No," I said. We splashed into the boiling surf. As I ran I pictured the fish. I remembered
being the fish. I focused as much as anyone can focus with a dozen or so Controllers chasing
her and shooting.
My feet went out from under me. They had shriveled and begun to disappear. I hit the water
and got a mouthful of salty foam.
I tried to keep my head above water, but my arms were rapidly disappearing. The waves were
high around me as I became smaller and smaller. My clothing billowed.
20
The people from The Sharing, the Controllers, raced to the water's edge. I could see their
lights, weirdly distorted as my eyes went from the air- adapted eyes of a human to the eyes of
a fish.
With what was left of my ears I heard, "The tracks lead right to the water."
Tom's voice. Then Chapman's. "I don't see them. They can't swim far. The current is too
strong. Fan out up and down the beach."
"Do you think these are the Andalite guerillas?"
"No. The tracks are human. Just some kids, probably. I doubt they saw anything. That fool
should not have been shooting."
"Sir," a new voice said. "We found a pair of jeans in the surf. Look like they could be for a
kid."
"Any identification in them?"
"No. Nothing."
"Coincidence," Chapman said. "Probably."
"If they're human, why don't we see them out there?" Tom asked. "Four sets of human tracks.
No humans in the water. Is it possible... is Visser Three wrong? What if they're not Andalites
at all?"
I sank beneath the water. The morph was almost complete. But as I went under I heard
Chapman laugh cruelly. "Visser Three wrong? Maybe. But I'm not the fool who's going to try
and tell
him."
The morph was complete. I was a fish, less than a foot long. A trout, to be exact. Excellent
broiled, fried, or grilled.
The saltwater was harsh on my scales, and my gills were barely able to breathe.
Everyone okay? It was Jake. Now that we had morphed we had the same thought-speech
ability as Tobias.
 I'm okay, I assured him. But I can barely breathe. I think we'd better be quick.
 I'm with Cassie, Rachel said. l feel like my scales are burning up. And my gills are on
fire.
Keep the shore on your left and go full speed as long as you can stand it, Jake advised.
Marco? Are you with us? I asked.
 Oh , sure. Where else would I be? What could possibly be more fun than running around
the sand dunes getting shot at and then jumping into the ocean and turning into a trout, who,
21
incidentally, can't live in saltwater? I wouldn't miss it for anything. Now can we go home and
watch TV?
22
Chapter 7
The next couple of days we didn't get together, except for passing each other in the hall ways
at school. We do have lives beyond being Animorphs, after all.
Rachel was busy with her gymnastics class. Plus she got to go to this ceremony where her
mom received some award for being Lawyer of the Year. (And since this is Rachel we're
talking about, going to an awards dinner meant major shopping for new everything.)
Jake had totally blown a test because he hadn't studied, so he had to do a paper as makeup
work. And I was busy helping my dad out in the barn with the golden eagle who had almost
been electrocuted. He was at a difficult stage of his recovery.
Tobias dropped by one evening and acted kind of snippy about me trying to save a golden
eagle. Golden eagles and hawks don't get along. Probably because golden eagles are known
to kill and eat hawks.
It was a couple of days later that Jake rode his bike over to my house. I didn't expect him, so I
was dressed like even more of a slob than usual. Plus I reeked of various horrible things
because I was mucking out the stables and cleaning the birdcages.
Typical guy. He had the totally bad timing to show up when I looked like Ms. Manure.
"Hey, Cassie," he said in his usual casual way, like nothing was going on.
"Hi, Jake. Did you come by to help me shovel manure?"
He grinned. He has a great smile. It appears kind of slowly, like it doesn't quite belong on his
serious face. "I don't know. Did I?"
"Yes, you did," I told him. I handed him a shovel. "If I have to smell, so do you."
We worked a little bit, with no sound but the steel shovel blades scraping the concrete. I
knew he had something to tell me. I can always tell. But I figured I'd let him get around to it
whenever he was ready.
"So," he said at last.
"So?" I echoed.
"Look, um, I guess everyone is kind of waiting to see what you decide to do."
This surprised me. I stopped shoveling. "What? What do you mean?"
"I mean, we're waiting to see what you decide to do about this dream of yours."
I shrugged. "I don't know. Besides, it's not just my dream. Tobias has it, too. And all of you
guys felt it a little, at least."
"Yeah, but Tobias figures he isn't going to be much help when... I mean, if we decide to do
something. We're talking water, and Tobias can't morph. As for the rest of us, I don't know.
23
Rachel and Marco were talking about whether it might have just been something they
imagined, you know? Because you made it seem so real and all."
"What do you think, Jake?"
Jake stopped working and wiped his forehead with the back of his hand. He looked straight
into my eyes. "Cassie, if you tell me it's real, it's real. I think you and Tobias are right. But
Marco is having second thoughts." He raised one eyebrow, as if to say "You know Marco."
I felt a queasy, sick feeling. "You mean, I'm supposed to make some kind of a decision? Like
I'm supposed to say what we do?"
"Cassie, you're the one with the dream. Only you can decide if it's real, and if it's real enough
for us to try and do something about it."
"I don't know if it's real," I said. What was he asking me to do? Every time we had tried to get
into it with the Yeerks, we had ended up barely escaping with our lives. Just two days had
passed since I'd heard bullets whizzing past me.
Jake waited until I met his gaze again. "Cassie, you know we all trust your instincts. You're
the best at understanding animals. You're the best morpher. You know everyone in the group
respects you."
I made a face. "Give me a break."
"If you think we should pursue this, you know Rachel will be right behind you. Me, too."
"And Marco?"
Jake grinned again. "Marco won't be right behind you. He'll be several feet back."
We both laughed.
"I don't know, Jake. It's a dream. It's like a vision or something. How do I know if it's real?"
He shook his head. "I don't know, Cassie. I guess you just have to take your best shot and
hope you're right."
I cringed at that. I'm not Rachel. I'm not a risk-taker. "Can't you decide for me?" I asked,
joking.
He nodded solemnly. "If you want me to, sure."
"And then if it's a disaster, it will all be on your head," I said. "You'll be the one who feels
bad. You'll be the one to blame." I reached out and touched his cheek. "That's incredibly
sweet of you. But you're right. I guess it's my decision this time."
I sighed and looked around at the barn. It smelled pretty bad, and sometimes it was a
nuthouse of yammering birds and howling wolves and whinnying horses, all needing care,
and all scared of the care we gave them. But it was the place I felt most at home in the whole
world.
24
Out through the door of the barn, the fields of corn and open meadow stretched off into the
distance, till they pressed up against the dark trees of the forest.
"I know this is crazy," I said, "but the ocean scares me a little. I understand the land. I under
stand soil and things that grow out of it." I laughed. "I guess I'm just an old farm girl. You
know this farm has been in my family since the Civil War?"
Jake winked. "Do I know that? Puh-leeze. I had Thanksgiving with your family last year, you
may remember. Your great-grandmother gave me the complete history."
"Going all the way back to when dinosaurs ruled the earth," I said. "Grammy does tend to go
on about our history, doesn't she?"
He looked serious again, almost hard. "It's your call, Cassie. It will be really dangerous and
we probably won't do much good. I mean, it's a big ocean out there. But it's your decision."
"Yep," I agreed. I shook my head slowly, sadly. "I believe these dreams are real. I believe
there's an Andalite out there, somewhere... somehow... trapped. Calling for help."
"Good enough," he said. "Now. How do we get out there?"
I frowned, thinking of the possibilities. "Some kind of fish? It would have to be some thing
fast. Something that isn't prey. You know, not some fish that's going to get snapped up by a
hungry tuna or whatever."
Jake nodded. "And it has to be something we can acquire. Which means, probably, something
at The Gardens."
"They have sea lions. And dolphins. But we can't morph them, can we?"
"Why not?"
"I... I don't know. It's just that, I mean, dolphins? They're highly intelligent. It seems kind of,
I don't know, kind of wrong."
"Well, you decide," he said, leaning his shovel against a wall. "I have to go. I can't blow
another test, and I have to study."
He climbed back on his bike.
"You're just saying that to get out of shoveling manure," I said.
"Cassie," he said, "I would rather shovel manure with you than do homework without you,
any day."
I think it was a compliment. Sort of.
He rode off, leaving me much less at ease than I had been before he'd come.
25
Chapter 8
The next day after school, the four of us headed toward The Gardens on a city bus. Tobias
flew. He said he'd be there before we were, but he wasn't sure how close to us he actually
could get.
The Gardens is this big amusement park that also includes a zoo. Only they don't call it a zoo,
they call it a "wildlife park." My mom works there. Actually, she's the head of medical
services, the head vet.
I have a pass to get in anytime I want, but the others all have to pay, which is kind of a drag
be cause Marco never has any money. Ever since Marco's mom died, his dad has been kind
of messed up. He just takes temporary jobs, and they're always broke.
I guess I kind of think it's romantic, the way Marco's dad has never gotten over his wife
dying. But on the other hand, it's like I had to learn when I started helping my dad with the
animals - sometimes death just happens, and all you can do is get over it the best you can.
It's tough for Marco because he feels like he has to take care of his dad - instead of having his
dad taking care of him.
On the bus, I glanced over at Marco. He was looking out of the window, being kind of quiet.
"Hey, Marco," I said.
"What?"
"Is that a new haircut? It looks good."
"Yeah?" He looked surprised. He ran his fingers back through his long brown hair and kind
of smiled.
I did some homework on the bus (math, gag, yuck!) and listened to my Walkman.
When we got there, it turned out there was a special on tickets - buy two and get the third
ticket for a dollar. Marco had a dollar, fortunately, so we didn't have to go through any big
scenes.
We cruised through the area where all the rides were, heading toward the wildlife park.
 Jake shook his head sadly, looking up at the monster roller coaster. "That used to be the
coolest thing in the world to me," he said. "But ever since I morphed a falcon, it just hasn't
seemed like any big deal. I mean, you're going maybe eighty miles per hour on a steel track.
When I was a falcon I did like two hundred miles an hour in midair."
"This morphing stuff does kind of change things," Marco agreed. "I used to want to get all
pumped up. Then I morphed into a gorilla, and it was like, why bother lifting weights? I can
just become a gorilla and bench press a truck."
"I don't feel that way," Rachel said. "Being a cat made me more interested in gymnastics. I
mean, as a cat I was just so totally, totally in con trol and graceful. Ever since then I've been
26
trying to use that feeling. When I'm on the balance beam I try and remember that cat
confidence."
"And then you fall off just the same as always?" I teased.
"Oh, yeah," Rachel said with a laugh. She made little walking fingers in the air that then fell
over. "Boom. I slip right off. But I feel confident while I'm falling off."
We reached the wildlife park entrance. The marine mammals are one of the first exhibits.
There's a main building, then there are several outdoor tanks.
We went straight for the largest outdoor tank. There were bleachers all around it on three
sides where people sat for performances. A show had just ended, and hundreds of people
were leaving. The next show would be in a couple of hours.
"Good timing," Jake said. "Not too big a crowd."
"It's a weekday afternoon," I said. "It's never all that crowded on school days."
We forced our way upstream against the rush of people, and reached the side of the tank.
It's pretty big. Like four or five big swimming pools. It's very blue, very clean-looking.
There's a low platform on one side where the trainers stand to communicate with the
dolphins.
"So what's the difference between porpoises and dolphins?" Marco asked. "Both just fish,
right?"
SPLOOSH!
The placid surface of the water exploded a few feet from us. Water sprayed across me.
"Oooooh!" we all said as one.
He flew straight up out of the water, like a sleek, pale gray torpedo. Eleven feet long from
nose to tail. Four hundred pounds. He simply flew into the air, seemed to hang there, ten feet
above the surface of the water, took a skeptical look at us, gave us his permanent wise-guy
grin, and slid back beneath the water so smoothly that there was barely a
ripple.
"That is a dolphin," I said to Marco.
"Okay, I like that. That is excellent," Marco said. "Did you see what he did?"
You know how really great athletes never look like they're even trying? Like Michael
Jordan? How everything they do is perfect, and you know they must have practiced for a
million hours, but they always look like, "Oh. No big deal. Of course I can fly through the
air. Nothing to it."
That's a dolphin in the water. Effortless. Per fect. Utterly in control.
27
Fish swim through the water. Sharks swim, tuna swim, trout swim, even people swim.
Dolphins don't just swim through the water. They own the water. The water is their toy. The
water is one big trampoline and the dolphins bounce around like kids having a good time.
Just watching them makes you happy. It also makes you feel like you're just this clunky,
awkward windup toy, jerky and stumbling and clumsy. Human beings may be the smartest
creatures on Earth, but we sure are dorky compared to a lot of other species.
"He's trying to get me to give him some more fish."
We all spun around. It was one of the dolphin trainers, a woman named Eileen.
"Oh, hi, Eileen," I said.
She nodded toward the dolphin, who was just exploding out of the water again. This time he
turned a neat little somersault. "Joey is the biggest con artist. He's always trying to get extra
fish."
"He's amazing," I said.
"Yes, he is," Eileen agreed, with a look of pride.
I introduced Jake, Marco, and Rachel. "We were looking at some dolphin information on the
Internet," I lied, "so we thought we'd come out and see the real thing."
"Well, as you know, we have six dolphins here. Joey, whom you've met, Ross, Monica,
Chandler, Phoebe, and Rachel. Hey, you guys want to feed them a little? You start throwing
fish in the water and they'll all come over."
"It won't upset their schedule?"
"Nah. Just don't let Joey get it all. He's kind of pushy."
Eileen left us with a nice big bucket of fish.
"That is some nasty-looking fish," Marco commented.
"Once you morph into one of these dolphins, you won't think that," Rachel pointed out.
Marco gave her a skeptical look. "Do you realize that just a couple days ago we were fish?
Not that much different than these fish ?"
He was right. But it wasn't something I wanted to think about. I've always been very in
volved with animals. But it is a whole different thing when you can become different
animals.
I took a fish by the tail and tossed it into the water. Just as Eileen suggested, the rest of the
dolphins showed up very quickly.
"Wow. Think these guys like to eat?" Rachel asked.
28
The dolphins put on quite a show. They obviously knew how to impress humans.
"It's just weird the way they grin at you," Marco commented. "I mean, it's like they actually
think something's funny."
"And they make eye contact," Jake pointed out. "They look right at you, right in the eye.
Most animals seem like they're looking past you, or just looking to see what you are. These
guys look at you like maybe they recognize you from somewhere."
Jake leaned over the edge of the tank to stroke one of the dolphins. "Hi there. Do I know you
from somewhere? Jake's my name."
The dolphin tossed his head back and forth like he was nodding "yes," chattering in his highpitched
dolphin voice.
"Okay, now that was weird," Rachel said. "It was like he was answering Jake."
"Are you so sure he wasn't?" I asked. "Dolphins are very intelligent. Not our kind of
intelligence, but still, I guess they're one of the two or three smartest animals around."
"It will be strange morphing something so intelligent," Rachel said.
"Yes," I agreed. Strange, and... wrong, somehow. I felt a twisting in my stomach. "How is
doing this any different than what the Yeerks do?"
Rachel looked surprised. "Yeerks take over humans," she said. "Besides, they don't morph,
they infest. We don't take over the actual animal, we just copy his DNA pattern, create a
totally new animal, and then - "
"And then control the new animal," I said.
"It's not the same," Rachel insisted. But she looked troubled.
"It's something I'll have to think about," I said. "It's kind of been bothering me."
Jake joined Rachel and me. "We'd better do it."
I nodded. "Yes, we should, before we run out of fish to feed these guys." I leaned over the
side of the tank and patted the head of the nearest dolphin. Her skin was rubbery, but not at
all slimy. Just like a wet rubber ball.
She grinned up at me, fixing me with one eye as she cocked her head to see me.
I pushed away my doubts, closed my eyes, and concentrated on the dolphin. She became
peaceful and calm, as animals always do during the acquiring process.
May I? I asked her silently. But of course she couldn't answer....
29
Chapter 9
That night I dreamed again of the voice under the sea, calling for help. Only this time it
sounded faint. Like a radio with the batteries growing weak. I wasn't sure if it was just a
regular dream this time. A dream of a memory that might or might not be real.
And I dreamed of the dolphin in her tank at the wildlife park. The one they called Monica,
although who knew if she had a true name of her own? How long had she been in that tank?
How long since she had been free in the open sea?
The next day was Friday. There was no school because of some teacher conference, so we
had a three-day weekend ahead of us.
I called Jake. "Hi, Jake. Are we going to the beach today like we planned?"
We were always very careful about anything we said over the telephone. Phone lines can be
tapped. Besides, Tom, Jake's brother, could listen in on an extension and overhear something
we didn't want him to hear.
"Actually, I was thinking the beach will be really crowded today," Jake said, sounding very
casual. "I was talking to Marco and he said maybe we should go down to the river instead."
It was a good suggestion. We couldn't exactly morph on a beach full of people.
"I'll be there in two hours, okay? I have some chores to do."
I ended up being a little late. They were all waiting for me.
It was an area I had been to before with my dad. It's a little park near a bridge. A good place
for fishing. About half a mile away, the river empties into the ocean. The river is lined with
trees along most of its length. Here and there are homes and private docks, but the spot we'd
chosen was hidden from the bridge and from any houses.
"Hi, Cassie," Jake said, smiling at me.
"Hi, everyone," I said. I spotted a movement in one of the tree branches. "Hey up there, To
bias. How's it going?"
The same old thing. You know how it is. It's a hawk-eat-mouse world out there.
I laughed, pleased to hear that Tobias was learning to be at peace with the fact that, at least
for a while, he was as much a hawk as he was a boy.
 I'm going to be the timekeeper, watching the deadly two-hour limit, Tobias said.  I'm the
only bird in the world with his own watch.
I looked closer and saw a very small digital timer strapped to one of his legs.
Rachel put it on for me, he explained.  I'll be over water the whole time, so I figured it
was fairly safe. No bird watchers around to see me and wonder 'Hmmm, when did red-tails
start wearing Timexes?'
30
Jake said, "I figured we'd hide our clothes, then wade into the river a little way, then start
morphing."
"Sounds good," Rachel said.
"Cassie? Will you go first?" Jake asked.
I nodded. "Sure." For some reason everyone has decided that I am the best morpher. I think
it's mostly silly. We can all morph fine.
But the first time we morph a new animal it's always kind of tense. You never know what it's
going to be like. You never know how much the animal's instincts and mind will resist you.
And this time there was a new fear, at least for me. What sort of mind would I find? Would it
be just the dolphin instincts, or would I encounter a true dolphin mind, with thoughts and
ideas of its own?
I shed my overalls and kicked off my shoes, leaving just the leotard that I thought of as my
morphing outfit. See, it's possible to morph some clothing along with you, but only
something skintight. Anything bulky you try to morph just ends up as rags. And shoes?
Forget shoes. We've all tried morphing shoes and it never works.
I stepped into the water. "Cold," I reported. The current tugged at my ankles.
I waded in a little farther, up to my waist.
Then I focused on the dolphin that was now a part of me.
The first change was my skin. It lightened from brown to pale gray. It was like rubber, tough
but springy.
That was good. I wanted to hang on to my legs as long as I could. I wanted to change as
many other aspects as I could before I had to drop down into the water.
I felt the odd crunching sound you get sometimes when bones are stretched or compressed.
And right before my eyes - literally - my face bulged out and out and out still farther.
"Oh, man, that's definitely not attractive,"
Marco groaned from the shore. "Not a good look for you, Cassie."
Morphing isn't usually very pretty. In fact, it's the kind of thing that, if you didn't know it was
going to be all right, would freak you out. I mean, I've watched while Rachel does her
elephant morph, and I can tell you, it is the creepiest, scariest, most disgusting thing you'll
ever want to see. Let alone watching people go from human to fish. Truly gross.
I didn't have a mirror, but I could guess how gross I looked. I had this huge, long bottlenose
sticking out of my otherwise normal face. My skin was gray rubber. And when I felt behind
me with my rapidly shriveling hands, I could feel the triangular blade of a dorsal fin rising
out of my spine.
31
My arms were gone, replaced by two flat flippers, and I was now standing about ten feet tall,
wobbling on my puny human-sized legs.
It was time to let the rest of the morph proceed. I surrendered my human legs. Instantly I fell
face forward into the water.
I looked down and saw my tail. I was cornplete. The water was too shallow, though, and I
was barely afloat. I kicked my tail, scraped across the sandy bottom, and finally surged out
into deeper water.
I waited for the moment when the dolphin brain would surface, full of instinct-driven need
and hunger and fear. The way it had always been before.
But it wasn't like that. It wasn't like a squirrel or even a horse.
This mind was not filled with fear and need.
This mind was... I know this sounds strange, but it was like a little kid. I tried to listen to it,
to understand its needs and wants. To prepare my self for a sudden onslaught of crude,
primitive animal demands. Flee! Fight! Eat!
But that didn't happen. I felt hunger, yes. But not the screaming, obsessive need that Jake felt
when he morphed a lizard or when Rachel became a shrew.
There was no fear. None.
And fortunately, I did not find a true thinking, conscious mind. I breathed a sigh of relief.
Just - again, I know it sounds strange - but I just found this feeling, like she wanted to play.
Like a little kid who wants to play. I wanted to chase fish, catch them, and eat them, but that
would be a game. I wanted to race across the sur face of the sea, and that would be a game,
too.
Cassie? I heard Tobias's thought-speech in my head. Are you okay?
Was I okay? I asked myself. Yes, Tobias. I'm... happy. I feel like... like I don't know. Like
I want you to come and play with me.
Play with you? Mmmm, I don't think so, Cassie. Hawks don't do water.
Come on, everyone! I called to the others. Come on! Let's go! Let's swim to the ocean! I
want to play!
Let's go! Come on, you guys, let's go!
I didn't like the river. I wanted the ocean. I could feel it close by. I could feel it in the way the
current rushed me forward. I could feel it in some deep, hidden part of my dolphin being.
The ocean. I wanted it. It was my place. It was where I should be.
We swam in a school, the four of us, with Tobias flying overhead.
32
We raced the river's current, and soon I could taste the salt. I could feel the saltwater on my
skin. It was as if I had opened the door of a toy store with every toy on Earth, and I had all
the time in the world to play.
I saw my friends around me, swift, pale shapes in the water. Sleek gray torpedoes as they
rose to breathe.
I lived in both worlds - the sea and the air. I saw the blue-green of the ocean, the pale blue
and white of the sky. I slipped back and forth through the bright barrier that separated them.
Jake went zipping by, shooting up from beneath me to explode into the air. I heard the slap of
his belly as he landed. It was a game! I dove deep, down to where the sandy floor sloped
toward depths even I could not explore. Then I powered my tail, steadied my flippers, and
drove hard toward the surface. Above me I could see the shimmering, silver border between
water and air.
Faster! Faster! I was a missile.
Yah haaaaah!
I shattered the barrier of the sea and hurtled up into the sky. I felt warm wind on my skin, in
stead of cold water. I hung, poised in midair, almost floating above the surface of the water.
Now the barrier was beneath me. I pointed my nose toward it and dropped from the sky.
Aaaaah!
The water wrapped around me, welcoming me back.
ls this cool, or what? Marco laughed in my head.
This is cool, I answered.
This is beyond cool, Rachel chimed in.
Let's all do it at the same time! Jake said.
The four of us dove deep. The ocean floor was still far below us, rippling sand dotted with
rocks and clumps of seaweed.
Near the ocean floor we leveled off, practically scraping our bellies on the bottom. And then,
aiming at the silver barrier once again, we shot upward, racing each other, ecstatic from the
joy of our own bodies' strength.
We launched into the air like a well-trained team of acrobats.
We flew, side by side, exhaling and refilling our lungs with warm air.
Life was joy. Life was a game. I wanted to dance. I wanted to dance through the sea.
So I did.
33
There was nothing I could not do. There was nothing I could ask of my body that it would not
give me. Racing, spinning, turning, diving, skimming the surface, flying up into the sky.
I wasn't just in the sea. I was the sea.
Are you guys just going to play all day? It was Tobias. You realize you've wasted fortyfive
minutes already?
Minutes? I laughed. Who cared about minutes?
Look, guys? I know you think the dolphin mind hasn't affected you, but it has. You need to
get a grip. You have a reason for being here.
Reason? What was that?
You're supposed to be looking for... well, for something, Tobias said. Something
unusual. An Andalite spaceship or something.
Yes, he was right. He was definitely right. But would it be fun? Would it be a game?
Find the spaceship. Cool, Rachel said. l bet I can find it first!
No way! Jake said instantly. l'll find it.
Where is it? Let's go look! Marco said.
Good grief, Tobias said. You're like a bunch of five-year-olds.
But I was too distracted to care. Hey. Can you guys do this? I concentrated, and suddenly,
from someplace in my forehead, came a series of loud, very rapid clicks, almost like loud
static.
Whoa! What was that?
Then, to my total surprise, I heard something in those clicks. It was weird. It was kind of like
hearing, only not. The clicking noises had hit something, far off in deeper water. I sort of felt
the sounds as they came back to me, like scattered echoes.
There was a universe of information in that echo. Some of that information made me uneasy.
You guys? I said. l know this is crazy, but I feel like there's something out there.
Something... I don't know. But I don't like it.
The others immediately began firing off the clicking noise that is the dolphin's underwater
radar. It's called echolocation.
Yeah, Marco said. Now I see it. I mean, I don't see it, but you know what I mean.
I searched in my dolphin mind, deep down in the places where instinct had been hidden be
neath layers of intelligence.
34
Then a picture just popped into my consciousness.
l know! I cried, as if I had just won a contest.  It's a shark!
Suddenly we weren't playing anymore. The others had all found the same instinct in
themselves. The echolocation indicated that there was a large shark nearby.
And we knew one thing for sure. We didn't like sharks.
35
Chapter 10
You know, I hate to sound like the only sensible person - so to speak -  Tobias said, but
you aren't here to fight sharks!
He's right, I agreed. Dolphins don't attack sharks unless the sharks attack first.
Wait... I'm getting more echoes, Rachel interrupted. There's more than one shark. And
there's something bigger, too.
I reached out with my echolocation sense and "felt" the sea ahead of me. You're right, I
said. Several sharks. And a great one.
A what? Tobias asked.
I was confused. What did I mean? The words great one had just popped into my mind. l
mean there's a whale. A whale. Being attacked by sharks.
A great one being attacked? Marco asked. He sounded upset. It was strange, because we
were all upset. More than we should have been.
You guys do what you want, Rachel said.  I'm going in.
 Oh , there's a big surprise, Tobias said with weary affection.
The four of us lanced forward, faster than ever, toward the whale in distress.
l see them, Tobias reported from the sky above. Straight ahead of you. Looks like four,
maybe five sharks and a big - really, really big - whale. Did I mention big? Wow. Big.
We were steaming through the water when I caught sight of my first shark. He was bigger
than me, maybe twelve feet long, with faint vertical stripes.
He was too excited by the hunt to notice me. Until it was too late. With every bit of speed and
power I could get from my tail, I rammed the tiger shark in his gill slits.
WHOOOOMP!
It was like hitting a brick wall. My beak was strong, but the shark was made of steel or some
thing.
I fell back, dazed. But as I tried to collect myself I saw that a trail of blood was billowing
from the shark's gills.
I swam beneath him, and then I saw the huge shape of the whale. He was a humpback, more
than forty feet long. Each of his long, barnacle-encrusted flukes was bigger than me.
He was trying to surface to breathe, but sharks were attacking, tearing at the soft, vulnerable
flesh of his mouth.
It made me angry. Very angry.
36
Suddenly, from the murky depths, Jake and Rachel zoomed upward, like missiles aimed at
the sharks.
WHOOMP! Rachel hit her target.
Jake's shark twisted just in time. Jake scraped across the shark's sandpaper skin, and before
he could get clear, the shark was after him.
Jake! He's on your tail!
l got him!
Look out! Conning up on your left, Marco!
They were as fast as we were, as maneuver-able as we were, and the sharks had one
terrifying advantage - they did not know fear.
He's on me! He's on me!
Aaaaarrrrggghh!
Marco!
l can't see! Where is he?
Cassie! Below you, lookout! Look out!
It was no longer a game. I had gone rushing into a fight full of confidence and determined to
help the whale. But now I was in a war. The sharks were killing machines. They seemed to
be nothing but armored skin and razor-sharp fins and wide jaws with row after row of
serrated teeth.
The water was boiling with twisting, turning, speeding sharks and us dolphins, locked in a
high-speed battle to the death.
It suddenly occurred to me that we might lose. We might be killed.
I might be killed.
The water was dark with blood, still billowing from the shark I had hammered.
Suddenly two of the sharks turned away. They just turned and swam away. At first, I didn't
know why.
Then I saw that they were following the shark I had wounded.
They were following the trail of blood.
They were at the limits of my sight when they struck. They ripped into the injured shark with
wild, uncontrolled fury.
37
The last shark turned from the battle and went after them. Robbed of his meal of whale meat,
he would feast on his brother instead.
Everyone okay? Jake asked.
 l have some cuts, but I'm okay, I said.
Same here, Rachel said. She sounded tired. I guess I did, too. I felt exhausted and drained.
The fight had probably only lasted two minutes from beginning to end. But it had been a long
two minutes.
Marco?
 I...I think I'm hurt, he said.
I looked for him. He was drifting in the water, almost motionless, twenty yards away. We all
swam over, crowding around him.
Then I saw the wound. I think I would have screamed, if I could have. His tail had almost
been bitten off. It was hanging by a few jagged threads. It was useless.
We were miles out in the ocean. And Marco could not hope to swim back.
38
Chapter 11
He's going to die if we don't do something, Rachel cried.
Cassie? Jake asked. What do we do?
 I...I don't know!
Cassie, you're the closest thing we have to an animal expert, Jake said urgently.
But I wasn't feeling at all like an expert. I was feeling like a fool. This was all my fault. It had
been my decision to go ahead. I was the one.
Aaaahhh, Marco moaned.  Oh , man. That's a major ouchie. Ahh, ahh!
What's happening? Tobias called down. Marco sounds hurt.
He is, Jake answered tersely.
 Oh , man, I don't want to die as some fish, Marco cried. l don't want to die out here. My
mom drowned. I'm going to die just like she did. My dad...
Morph! I yelled. l think I know what to do. Morph back to human.
lf he morphs to human, he'll just drown, Rachel argued.
No. Morphing uses DNA, right? The basic pattern of the animal. Marco morphs back to
human. I don't think the injury will affect him, because it doesn't affect his human DNA.
Then, as soon as he can, he morphs back to dolphin. The dolphin body was injured, but the
dolphin DNA should be the same. He should be a healthy, normal dolphin again.
What if you're wrong? Rachel asked bluntly.
There's no other choice, Jake said. Marco? You have to morph back to human. We'll
keep you from drowning.
Jake... buddy... You know I can't swim.
l know, Marco. But we'll take care of you.
 Okay. Yeah, okay. Might as well die in my own body. Ahh. Ahhhh! Maybe it won't hurt as
much. Maybe...
He was drifting off. He's losing blood, I said. He may pass out. Marco. Morph. Now!
We formed a circle around him, the three of us, with Tobias drifting overhead and the big
humpback resting alongside.
Then Marco began to change. Arms sprouted from his flippers. His face flattened down, with
his wide, grinning dolphin mouth shortening to form Marco's own lips. His skin turned pink
and his morphing suit appeared.
39
His shattered, injured tail split in two. Legs formed from the halves, toes appeared. Human
toes. At the end of human legs.
He did it!
"Yeah, I did it. And now I'm drowning!"
Here, I said, swimming beside him. Grab onto me.
He wrapped his arms over my back, and I held him up to the air.
Then I noticed something strange. It was like the ocean floor was rising to meet me.
No. It was the humpback. He had dived beneath us, and was rising slowly, slowly to the sur
face.
Look out! The whale! Rachel yelled.
But at that moment the most incredible part of an incredible day happened.
My mind, human, dolphin, both minds, opened up like a flower opening to the sun.
And a silent, but somehow huge, voice filled my head, it spoke no words. It simply filled
every corner of my mind with a simple emotion.
Gratitude.
The whale was telling me that it was grateful. We had saved it. Now it would save our
schoolmate.
Back away, I told Rachel and Jake.  It's okay.
Yeah, Rachel agreed, sounding amazed. l hear it, too. Or feel it. Or whatever.
The humpback rose beneath a sputtering Marco. The broad leathery back lifted him up. And
when I looked again, I saw Marco, sitting nervously on what could have been a small island,
high and dry above the choppy waves.
Tobias fluttered down and rested beside him.
The whale called me to him.
Listen, little one, he commanded, in a silent voice that seemed to fill the universe.
I listened. I listened to his wordless voice in my head. I felt like it went on forever.
40
Chapter 12
Tobias said later it was only ten minutes. But during that ten minutes, I was lost to the world.
I was being shown a small part of the whale's thoughts.
He had lived eighty migrations. He had many mates, many mothers, who had died in their
turn. His children traveled the oceans of the world.
He had survived many battles, traveled to the far southern ice and the far northern ice. He re
membered the days when men hunted his kind from ships that belched smoke.
He remembered the songs of the many fathers who had gone before. As others would
remember his song.
But in all he had seen and all he had known, he had never seen one of the little ones become a
human.
Marco, I realized. He means Marco. And little ones? Is that what the whales call dolphins?
We are not truly... little ones.
No. You are something new in the sea. But not the only new thing.
I wasn't sure what he was telling me. He spoke only in feelings, in a sort of poetry of
emotion, without words. Part of it was in song. Part of it I could only sense the same way I
could sense echolocation.
Something new?
He showed me a picture, a memory. It was a broad, grassy plain, with trees and a small
stream. All of it underwater. And across the grass ran an animal that was part deer, part
scorpion, part almost human.
Where is it? I asked him in a language of squeaks and clicks and mind-to-mind feeling.
And he told me.
Suddenly I woke up. That's how it felt, any way. The whale released me. It was like coming
out of a dream.
Are you okay? Jake asked. You were starting to worry us, but we had this feeling maybe
the whale didn't want us to interferes
 I'm fine, I said.  I'm beyond fine.
Marco's ready to try remorphing, Jake reported.
Uh-huh, I said, still lost in images from a mind larger and older and so utterly strange.
Guys? You have about twenty-five minutes, Tobias reported. And it's a long way back to
shore.
41
I heard Marco say something, but he was speaking normally now, not in thought-speak, so it
was hard to make it out with my ears under the water.
I stuck my head up and saw him begin to re sume his dolphin shape.
Halfway through, he slipped off the side of the whale and back into the water. His fins
formed. His beak.
And his tail. Perfect and healthy and undamaged.
We headed for shore, tired but alive.
I felt strange, leaving the whale. But when we were a mile away, I heard his song - slow,
mournful, haunting notes.
Why didn't he sing more when we were with him? Jake wondered.
I smiled inwardly. And of course, since I was a dolphin at the moment, I smiled outwardly,
too.
He doesn't sing for the little ones, I explained. He sings for the mothers.
What? Marco asked.
He sings for a mate.
Ahh. Cruising for chicks. Got it. I wonder if the big old guy even realizes that he helped
save my life.
Marco, that big old guy realizes things you and I will never even be able to guess.
42
Chapter 13
T he next day I went to see Marco at his home.
He and his dad live in a garden apartment complex. One of the older ones, on the far side of
the big neighborhood where Jake and Rachel both live. I'd only been over there a couple of
times. I think Marco is kind of embarrassed be cause he doesn't have much money.
He used to live in a house just down the street from Jake. But that was when his mother was
still alive, and before his father had a breakdown and quit his job.
I knocked on the door. From inside I heard Marco's voice. "Dad, there's someone at the door.
Put on your bathrobe, okay?"
There was a delay, and then the door opened. Marco looked annoyed.
"Cassie. What are you doing here?"
"I wanted to talk to you."
"To me? What about?"
"About yesterday," I said.
He hesitated. "Look, I'm spending the day with my dad, okay? We're thinking maybe we'll..
. you know, do something together."
"That's good," I said. Over Marco's shoulder I could see his father. He was wearing a
bathrobe and sitting on the couch. He was staring at the TV. That was normal for any dad, I
guess, on a weekend morning. But I had the feeling that Marco's dad was always sitting right
there in front of the TV.
"Look, Marco, I just want to talk for a minute. Can I come in?"
"No, no," he said hastily. He stepped outside onto the concrete breezeway. Down below us
was a swimming pool. It was drained and closed. Leaves covered the bottom.
"Marco, I wanted to talk to you about yesterday."
"What about it?"
"You could have been killed. It would have been my fault. This whole mission was my idea.
Jake asked me if we should do it and I said yes."
Marco rolled his eyes. "That's it? Look, it wasn't your fault. It's this whole thing we're doing,
this whole Animorph thing. I mean, it's been dangerous right from the start. It's insanely
dangerous. What else is new?"
I shrugged. "What's new, I guess, is that the other times it was always someone else's idea."
"Oh, I get it. You don't like responsibility?"
43
I winced. Was that it? Was I afraid of taking responsibility? "I don't want to get my friends
killed."
"And let me assure you your friends don't want to get killed, either," Marco said with a laugh.
"I am completely opposed to getting killed." He grew serious, even sad. "But you know
what? Sometimes bad things happen. That's the way it is."
I leaned against the rail, looking down at the dismal empty pool. "I see things die all the time,
" I said. "Animals, I mean. Sometimes you can't save them. Sometimes we even have to put
them down - end their suffering. But my dad makes those decisions. Not me. He's the vet. I'm
just his assistant."
"Look, here I am, all alive," Marco said, tap ping his chest. "Get over it. I didn't have to go. It
was my choice."
"Were you scared?"
For a while he didn't answer. He just came over and leaned on the railing beside me. "I'm
scared all the time now, Cassie," he said at last. "I'm scared to fight the Yeerks, and I'm
scared of what will happen if I don't. I look at Tobias, and what happened to him scares me to
death. What if I get stuck in morph someday? And most of all, I am scared of... of him."
I didn't have to ask who Marco meant by him. Visser Three.
"That first time, in the construction site, when he killed... when he murdered the Andalite."
Marco made a twisted smile. "I see that in my head every day. And the Yeerk pool." He
shook his head. "That's something I would like to forget, too."
"Yes," I agreed. "There has been a lot of fear."
"So was I afraid yesterday? Bet on it. I was scared plenty. It was like, man, it's not bad
enough we have to fight Hork-Bajir and Taxxons and Visser Three, we also have to fight
sharks? Sharks?" He laughed, and hearing him brought the laughter out of me.
We both just stood there and giggled like idiots for a few minutes. It was that laughter you
get after something really tense has happened. Relief laughter. "We're still alive" laughter.
"Urn, by the way, I was going to wait and tell everyone at the same time," Marco said, "but I
think we have a problem."
"What problem?"
"It was in the newspaper this morning - two stories. One is about this guy who is going to be
looking for some supposedly lost treasure ship off the coast. The other was this story about
some big marine biologist guy who has a ship and is going to be doing some underwater
exploration
off our coast."
"Yes? So?"
44
"So, all of a sudden our nearby ocean seems to be very interesting to people. Treasure hunters
and an underwater exploration? At the same time?"
"Controllers?"
He nodded. "I think so. I think it's all a cover story to explain why two ships will be out there
with lots of divers in the water. I think it's them, all right. And I think they're looking for the
same thing you're looking for."
I felt weak. The image the whale had given me surfaced in my mind. And the faint cry in my
dreams, the cry for help.
"I... I can't ask anyone to go out there again," I whispered. "This time we might not be so
lucky."
Marco looked uncomfortable. "Cassie, you know how I feel about all this. I think we have to
take care of ourselves first. And our own families." He glanced back at his apartment door.
"On the other hand... I guess after what the Andalite did for us, I wouldn't feel like much of a
human being if I didn't try to save whoever is out there."
"I don't know who's out there," I said. "I don't know if it's even real."
"But you think it's an Andalite."
"I think it is. But Marco, I don't know. If someone gets hurt... killed... just because I have
these dreams - I can't make that kind of decision."
"Yes, but can you decide to do nothing? That's a decision, too."
I had to smile. "Marco, you know, for a guy who's always joking around and being annoying,
you're awfully smart."
"Yeah, I know, but don't tell anyone. It would destroy my image."
I started to walk away.
"You know what was strange about yesterday?" Marco said.
"What?"
"The sharks. They were so totally deadly. I mean, we worry about Hork-Bajir and Taxxons
and Visser Three. You kind of forget that right here on little old planet Earth there are
creatures just as tough and dangerous. It would be funny if it wasn't some alien that ended up
getting us, but some normal Earth creature."
I didn't think it was funny at all.
Marco grinned at my stone face. "Okay, not funny ha-ha. More like funny weird."
45
Chapter 14
"Okay," Jake said. "Here's what we know. Or at least, what we think we know."
We were all at Rachel's house again. It was a few hours after I had gone to see Marco. Tobias
was perched on the windowsill. He didn't feel all that comfortable being inside for long. He
liked the feel of the wind and the open air.
"First, we believe that somehow a surviving Andalite, or maybe more than one Andalite, is
trapped out in the ocean."
"Hopefully Andalites can hold their breath for a really long time," Marco joked.
"Second, Cassie believes she can find this Andalite, thanks to the information from the
whale."
Everyone kept a straight face for about ten seconds. Then, all at once, everyone cracked up.
"Information from a whale," Marco repeated, giggling.
Have our lives gotten really weird, or is it just me? Tobias asked.
"Weird? Weird?" Marco crowed. "The talking bird wants to know if getting information on
the location of an alien from a whale, that you've just saved from sharks, by turning into
dolphins... You're suggesting that's weird?"
Jake smiled. "Well, stay tuned. It just gets weirder. Cassie and I have been going over maps.
She says the location we're looking for is pretty far out to sea. Too far for us to swim and still
have any time left of our two-hour limit."
"Well, that's the ball game, isn't it?" Marco asked.
Jake nodded at Rachel. "I was talking to Rachel earlier and she has an idea."
Rachel stood up. She'd been lounging on the bed. "We hop a ride on a ship. First we morph
into something like a seagull."
Marco groaned. "I hate plans that begin with the words 'first we morph.'"
"We morph into seagulls," I said, picking up the plan we'd worked out. "Then we fly out into
the shipping channel. We land on a tanker or a container ship or something that's going the
right direction. We morph back to human, rest up, let the ship get us closer, then jump over
the side, morph to dolphin and go the rest of the way."
"Oh, well, when you put it that way, it sounds so easy," Marco sneered. "How about if we
just walk over to Chapman's house and tell him to call Visser Three to finish us off? It's so
much easier, and the results will be the same."
Jake sighed. "It is dangerous and risky, and there are about a hundred things that could go
wrong. Plus, as Marco has told us, we have reason to think that Controllers will be out there,
searching for the same thing we're searching for."
46
"This idea just gets better and better," Marco said.
"Let's put it to a vote," Jake suggested.
"I'm in," Marco said instantly.
A split second behind him, Rachel said her usual "I'm in."
Everyone stared openmouthed at Marco.
"Just once I wanted to beat Rachel to it," he explained.
"Tobias?" Jake asked.
l don't think I should vote. I have to sit this one out. I can't stay up that long with nowhere to
set down. Sorry.
"You had the dreams, just like Cassie," Jake pointed out. "Do you think we should do this or
not?"
Tobias fixed his fierce glare on me. Yes, Cassie and I both had the dreams. I think they're
real.
"Okay, looks like we go," Jake said briskly. "Tomorrow. First thing in the morning. We can't
wait any longer. The longer we hold off, the greater the chance the Yeerks will beat us to it."
We left Rachel's house. Marco split off in one direction. Tobias flew off to some unknown
destination. Jake and I walked together for a while, even though it was out of his way.
"I think Tobias is feeling kind of left out," I said. "You should talk to him later, remind him
of how many times he's helped us out."
"That's a good idea," Jake agreed.
We walked a little farther in silence. It's one of the nice things about the relationship Jake and
I have. We can be quiet together and feel okay about it.
"This is really dangerous, isn't it?" I asked him.
He nodded.
Suddenly I stopped walking. I don't know why, but I had this need to tell him something. I
took his hand and held it between both of mine. "Jake?" I said.
"Yes?"
It was on the tip of my tongue, but then it seemed ridiculous to say it. So instead I said,
"Look, don't ever get hurt, okay?"
He smiled that smile. "Me? I'm indestructible."
47
The way he said it, I almost believed him. But then, as he went his way and I headed toward
home, I glanced up at the sky.
Against the blaze of sunset I saw a flash of russet tailfeathers. Tobias. Our friend, who had
been trapped forever in a body not his own.
None of us was indestructible.
48
Chapter 15
Hey! Half a sandwich! It's salami!
Look over there. Is that a Jujubee?
Pizza! Pizza! Part of the crust and it's one of those stuffed crusts!
Fortunately, one thing we always have plenty of in the Wildlife Rehabilitation Center (also
known as my barn) is seagulls.
We acquired the seagull DNA. Then the four of us, with Tobias watching from the high
rafters, morphed into the new bodies.
I have been a bird before. An osprey, to be ex act, one of the types of hawk.
But gulls are different in some ways. For one thing, they are scavengers, not predators. So as
we took wing and flew in a rush of white from the open hayloft, I noticed different things,
felt different things. My seagull mind was not searching for mice or scurrying animals. It was
much more openminded. My seagull intelligence looked for anything - anything - that could
even possibly be food.
Fortunately, the gull brains were close enough to the other bird brains we'd all experienced
that it was fairly easy to control them. We didn't waste a lot of time getting started.
Although, once we did get started, everyone was constantly pointing out food.
Hey! Look! French fries on the ground.
Whoa! That's half a 3 Musketeers bar by that car!
O ooh, ooh! Look at the Dumpster behind that McDonald's!
Sometimes you just have to accept the animal's basic mindset and go with it.
There's the beach, Jake said as we flapped and soared and flapped some more.
It's easier being an osprey in some ways. Much less flapping.
Once we were out over the water, we could at least stop scanning for food. Mostly.
Hey! Is that a bag of potato chips floating down there?
We flew low, just a few dozen feet above the water. Not like hawks, who can ride the
thermals up to the bellies of the clouds.
But Tobias wasn't much higher than we were now. There are no thermals over water and he
was having to flap a lot to stay aloft.
We flew on, skimming the choppy surface of the water.
Hey, look, Rachel said. Over to the left.
49
Sleek gray shapes sliced through the water, up, down, up, down, breaking the silvery barrier
between sky and sea. It was a school of dolphins.
You know, sometimes this is just so wonderful Rachel said. l mean, we're flying. We're
flying! And later, we'll be like them, at home in the water.
Yeah, just us and the sharks, Marco said darkly.
Still, it is cool, Rachel said.
There's a ship up ahead, Jake announced.
You just now noticed it? Tobias laughed. Wow. Seagull eyes aren't exactly great, are
they? It's a container ship called Newmar. It's from Monrovia. You want to know what color
the captain's hair is?
Show-off, Jake grumbled.
Hawk eyes are totally amazing. As long as it's sunny out, Tobias can read a book from like
three blocks away.
It was hard, flying to catch up to the ship. It was moving fairly fast, and by the time we were
close I was exhausted.
The ship was gigantic, painted a rusty blue, with a deck longer than a football field. The
superstructure was all crammed toward the back. That's where the crew would be, so we flew
forward, hoping to find someplace private.
The deck was stacked with containers, big steel boxes like trailers. Row after row of them
lined the deck, and we could see hundreds more down in the hold.
We settled in the narrow space between two rows of containers, far forward. It was like
having walls all around us. Corrugated metal walls that went high over our heads.
Tobias? How much time? Jake asked.
Tobias twisted his head down to see the tiny watch strapped to his talon.  It's been about an
hour and a half.
We decided to resume our human shapes. The space between the rows of containers was even
narrower when we were fully human again.
"Brrr. It's chilly out here," I said. The steel deck was cold beneath my bare feet. And even
though the sun was high in the sky, we were in shadow.
"Man, I swear, this is the worst thing about morphing," Marco said. "Can someone please
figure out how to morph shoes, and maybe a sweater? Come on, Cassie. You're the morphing
genius. I'm sick of these morphing outfits."
"But you look so cute in Spandex," Rachel teased him.
50
"Plus, they aren't exactly fashionable. All I'm saying is - uniforms. Something cool-looking.
And warm. Warm would be nice. When winter comes, we are going to be some sad little
Animorphs."
"I have a more important question," Rachel said. "How do we know when we're there? You
know, our destination."
Jake made a "who knows?" face. "I figure this ship is going like, what, twenty miles per
hour? Figure an hour, and that puts us twenty miles out, right?"
Rachel pointed a finger at her forehead and said, "Jake's a total mathematical genius. One
hour at twenty miles per hour. Right away he figures out that's twenty miles."
Jake laughed. "That's about all the math I can do."
Actually, we're moving about eighteen miles per hour, Tobias said.
We all just stared at him.
I fly along the roads sometimes and watch the car speedometers. So I have a pretty good
idea how fast I'm flying. When we were flying alongside the ship, I clocked it.
"Okay, eighteen miles an hour, more or less, straight south," Marco considered. "That would
put us within a couple of miles of where Cassie thinks we should go."
I winced. Every time anyone said something about me deciding where to go or what to do, it
made me nervous.
I'd better head back, Tobias said regret fully. l don't want to try and fly eighteen miles
back without a rest. And if I stay on this ship I'll end up in Singapore.
"Singapore?" Rachel asked.
Yeah. I read the captain's log as we were flying alongside. That's where they're heading.
Tobias flew off, leaving us the little watch.
It was extremely dull waiting for an hour, with nothing to do but try and guess what was in
the big containers all around us. On the other hand, we knew what we had to do next would
definitely not be boring.
So basically, we were happy to just be bored for a while, huddling together to stay warm in
the whipping ocean breeze.
51
Chapter 16
After a long time, Jake checked the watch. "It's been about an hour. Cassie? What do you
think?"
"I don't know," I admitted. "I... I guess I was hoping that when I was back in dolphin morph
I would be able to make sense of more of the details the whale communicated to me. It was
mostly images. And some of the images were about sounds and currents and water
temperatures, and stuff you can't see from the surface."
Jake thought for a moment. "Oh, well, now is as good as any time, I guess. Let's head for the
side."
We stood up, uncramping our cold, stiff legs and arms. We moved along the row of
containers toward the left side of the ship. The port side, as they say.
We reached the side. There was a solid steel railing that ran all around, about waist high. Jake
checked to see if we would be in view of the bridge, and we headed forward a little more to a
blind spot where no one should see us.
The four of us leaned over the rail and looked down at the water. It looked like it was a
million miles below.
Marco whistled. "Man. That is some high dive."
"No big deal for a seagull or a dolphin, but a mighty long way for a human," I agreed.
"We can't morph up here. We'd never get our dolphin bodies over the side," Rachel pointed
out.
"Nope," Jake agreed. "We have to jump in with our human bodies. All except Marco. He
can't swim. I thought he could morph up here, and then we could all shove him over the side.
"
Rachel looked skeptical. "Jake? When Marco is in dolphin morph, he'll weigh like four
hundred pounds."
Jake looked worried. "I kind of didn't think about this when I was planning."
I had a sinking feeling. The plan was falling apart before it had even begun.
"I'll lean against the railing," Marco suggested. "I'll start morphing, then, before I lose my
legs, you guys help shove me over. I'll finish morphing within a few seconds of hitting the
water."
"Unless the water knocks you out and you just sink," I said flatly. "Forget it. Forget it. Let's
just morph back to seagulls and fly back home. This is insane."
"Insane?" Marco echoed. "Hey, that's my word. Look, we came this far."
52
"I don't care!" I yelled, surprised at my own passion. "I'm not going to be responsible for any
one dying! This isn't going to work. I don't know where I am. I don't know where we're
going. I don't know what to do!"
Marco laughed. "Excellent pep talk, Cassie. Now I'm really looking forward to this."
I was going to yell at him, something like, "Look, Marco, this is not a joke." But when I
looked at him, I saw that his face was bulging way out, forming a long, grinning beak.
He had already started to morph.
"I'm nock koink to..." he started to say. But his mouth no longer worked.
He was growing larger, straining his weak human legs with his weight. His arms were
flattening into flippers.
"Now!" Jake said. He grabbed Marco's flipper arm. Rachel and I jumped forward and seized
his legs just as they began to shrivel.
"Heave!" Jake yelled.
Marco, half human, half dolphin, tumbled backward over the railing and fell into the sea.
"Let's go," Jake said.
"Yee-hah!" Rachel said with a wild grin. She jumped up on the railing, balanced for a
moment like the gymnast she was, then launched herself off in a neat swan dive.
Jake and I exchanged a glance.
"Rachel," he said, and rolled his eyes.
"She's your cousin," I pointed out.
"On the count of three. One, two..."
"Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhh!" I climbed over the rail ing and launched myself as far from the steel
wall of the ship as I could.
"Aaaaaaaaaahhhh!"
I fell for what seemed like a very long time.
PAH-LOOOOSH!
I hit the water feet first and plowed beneath the surface in a pillar of bubbles.
The cold shocked me. The water was like ice. And just a few feet away was the intimidating
steel wall of the tanker, sliding past at what felt like incredible speed.
53
I kicked my feet and began to rise to the sur face. I've been a swimmer since I was little, but
it frightened me, being this far out in water this deep. This wasn't a pool or a pond. This was
the ocean. Twenty miles from land.
I broke the surface and gasped a lungful of air and a mouthful of saltwater. What had looked
like a little choppiness from up in the ship felt like towering waves down here. I couldn't see
any of the others. All I could see was the side of the ship.
Come on, Cassie, I told myself, morph. Do it. This is no place for a person.
There is just about nothing as helpless as a human being in the ocean. Without my ability to
morph I would not have lasted an hour.
I felt the change begin as I focused on morphing. At first, I thought it would kill me. I soon
had most of the weight of a dolphin, with nothing but my human feet paddling to keep my
head above water. My arms had already become flippers.
A wave washed over me, leaving me sputtering from my mouth and my blowhole at the same
time.
I realized I could no longer keep my head above water. I took a deep lungful and let myself
sink.
As my eyes went from human to dolphin, my underwater vision improved. I could see other
figures kicking and writhing in the water around me. Jake, half-changed. Rachel, almost
cornplete. Marco, with a dolphin grin, looking amused.
Then, with a kick of my newly completed tail, I knew I was safe. I had made the change. I
was a dolphin in a dolphin's world. The human clumsiness, the human cold, the human fear
of an alien environment, all evaporated.
I was warm and in control and right where I should be.
Everyone okay?
One by one they answered. We had made it. Too bad this was just the easy part of the
mission.
Well, that was fun, Marco said sardonically. Let's never, ever do it again.
Cassie? Jake prodded me.
I tried to relax, to let my human mind recede just a little. I needed to listen to the dolphin
instincts. I needed to understand the whale's in structions. Something no human could ever
do.
Not far, I said. We're just a few... urn... Forget it, there's no word for it. Just believe
me, we're close.
After you, Cassie, Jake said.
54
It felt strange, taking the lead. But only I knew the way. We traveled near the surface for a
while. This made it confusing for me, because whales go deeper, and the world the whale
saw and knew was a deeper world than I, as a dolphin, experienced.
And yet, I knew I was going in the right direction. My echolocating clicks painted murky,
half- understood pictures in my mind of underwater hills and valleys and rifts. I felt currents
tugging at me. I sensed changes in water temperature.
In the end, I just knew.
 Okay , everyone, get a good lungful, I said.
We surfaced, blew out the stale air, and filled our lungs with the good clean ocean air.
Hey. What's that? It was Rachel.
What? I asked her.
Over there. It's a helicopter.
We all watched as a helicopter flew low and very slowly over the water. It was just a few
hundred yards away, and with our dolphin vision, we couldn't see it as well as we might have
with our human eyes.
But as it flew closer, I could see that it was dragging a cable through the water.
Some sort of sensor, Jake speculated.
They're looking for something in the water, Marco agreed.
 It's them, I said.
No one argued. We all knew it was true. Controllers were flying that helicopter.
The Yeerks were here.
55
Chapter 17
Everyone take in as much air as you can, I said again. We're going deep.
We dove and swam almost straight down. Down, down, leaving the bright barrier behind.
Away from the sun. Away from the light. Away from the air that we needed just as much as
humans did.
I echolocated a school of fish ahead, just below us. But we weren't there to eat lunch. We
swam through the fish and still we headed down. Down until we could see the ocean floor
beneath us.
We leveled off and skimmed across the ocean floor, like low-flying jets racing at treetop
level. Over waving fields of seaweed. Through darting schools of fish. Over jutting
extrusions, of rock, encrusted by barnacles and home to a thousand bizarre crabs and lobsters
and urchins and worms and snails.
Ahead was a ridge, a sort of long, low hill. We sailed over it.
 I'm starting to feel like maybe taking a breath would be a good thing, Rachel said. How
much farther - 
We all saw it at the same time.
Saw it, yes, but could hardly believe it.
I've become used to seeing impossible things - aliens, spaceships, my own friends turning
into animals. But this was just plain mind-boggling.
It was round. As round as a plate. A very large plate. From one side to the other, the diameter
must have been half a mile.
It was covered by a transparent dome. Clear glass, or whatever it is the Andalites use for
glass.
And within the dome, protected from the crushing force of the water, was what looked very
much like a park.
A park, in a plastic dome, at the bottom of the ocean.
There was grass, more blue than green, but it still looked like grass. There were trees like
huge stems of broccoli. And other trees like orange and blue asparagus spears. At the center
was a small lake, crystal-clear blue water. From the water grew fantastic, transparent green
crystals in shapes like eccentric snowflakes.
Whoa, Marco said.
Man, Jake commented.
I s this what you expected, Cassie? Rachel asked me.
I... I had dreams... I saw flashes of something... but this! This is unbelievable.
56
l think that may be a hatch down there, Marco said. You see the part that sticks out?
Let's try it, Jake said. l can't hold my breath much longer.
We arced down toward a part of the glass dome that seemed different from the rest. As we
got closer, we could really begin to feel the size of the dome. It was like approaching one of
those huge stadiums where they play football. But even bigger, if you can imagine that.
It is a hatch, Rachel reported. She was a little ahead of the rest of us.  It's some kind of a
glass door. On the other side there's a little room, then another door that leads into the dome.
There's a little red panel beside the outer door.
Let's either try it or surface, Marco said urgently.
That red panel. That's got to be the door-knob, Jake said. Here goes. Let's hope this
works. He pressed his beak against the panel.
Instantly the outer door opened.
We should try this one at a time, see if it's safe, Marco said.
Not enough time, I said. My lungs were burning. I needed air.
The four of us swam in through the outer door. There was a second red panel. I punched it
with my beak and the door closed, sealing us into a small, glass room. We could see out and
up into the ocean all around. But the side leading into the dome was opaque.
l knew we'd end up in an aquarium sooner or later, Marco said.
The water began to drain from the room, slowly, a little at a time. This opened an area of air
at the top of the enclosure. I raised my blow hole and sucked in blessed oxygen.
 Okay , let's morph, Jake said.
I had already started. By the time the enclosure was half drained, I could stand on my own
human feet.
"We made it," Marco said after his human mouth reformed. "I don't know where we made it
to, but we made it."
The enclosure was empty now. The four of us stood there barefoot, dressed only in our soggy
morphing outfits. There was one last red panel beside the door leading into the dome.
"Ready?" Jake asked.
"As ready as I'll ever be," Marco said.
Jake pressed it with his hand.
The door slid open. I felt a wave of warm, incredibly fragrant air rush in.
57
I caught a glimpse of...
Then a brilliant flash of light...
And suddenly I was unconscious.
58
Chapter 18
I opened my eyes. I was staring straight up. I was on my back. Above me I could see the
ocean all around. High overhead, fish swam by, sparkling. Higher still I could see the bright
bar rier between sea and sky. But it was very far away.
I rolled my head to the side. Jake was beside me, still unconscious. There was blue grass
under my head. I looked the other way.
"Yaaaahh!"
Do not move. I stunned you to see what you are. But if you move, I will destroy you.
He stood on four delicate hooves, looking, at first glance, like a pale blue and tan deer or
antelope. But he had a strong upper body, like a mythical centaur, with two small arms and
many-fingered hands. His face was almost triangular, built around two huge, almond-shaped
eyes. There was a small vertical slit where his nose should have been, and nothing where his
mouth should have been.
From atop his head rose twin horns. Only they were not horns. They each ended in an eye
and turned this way and that, independent of his main eyes.
He seemed gentle, quizzical, almost delicate. Until you noticed the tail. The tail was like a
scorpion's. It was thick, powerful, and ended in a wicked scythe blade that literally glittered
along its razor-sharp edges.
I knew what he was. There is no mistaking an Andalite when you see one.
And there was no question about what he was holding in his hand, either. It looked a lot like
a Yeerk Dracon beam.
He was pointing it at me.
The others were waking up all around me.
"What the... Oh," Marco said. "Please tell me that's a real Andalite and not Visser Three."
Suddenly, without warning, the Andalite's tail arched forward. The blade stopped inches from
Marco's face.
 Visser Three! Do not speak that name! the Andalite thought-spoke.
"O -o-o-o-kay," Marco said slowly. "Whatever you want."
"We are friends," I said.
l don't know you, the Andalite said. But he withdrew his tail and Marco started breathing
again.
"You called me," I said. "We've come to help you."
Called? You heard my call? He fixed all four of his eyes on me. What are you?
59
"Human. A person of Earth."
l have seen images of your kind. My call was to my cousins. How did you hear it?
"I don't know," I admitted. "I heard it in my dreams. So did a friend of mine. We guessed it
was an Andalite. We wanted to help."
What do you know of Andalites? My people are not known to humans. You do not travel
the stars. You know only your own planet. My elder cousins have taught me this.
"We knew one Andalite. We were with him when... when he was killed."
The Andalite narrowed his main eyes. Who was this Andalite you say was killed?
I searched my memory for his name. He had told us, but it was a strange, long name. "I can't
remember all of his name. But part of it was Prince Elfangor."
The Andalite jerked as if he'd been hit. His entire body seemed to quiver. His deadly tail
arched high in the air.
Prince Elfangor? No one could kill Elfangor. He is the greatest warrior ever. No one could
kill him!
"Someone did," Jake said. "We were there."
Who? Who do you claim killed Elfangor?
"The one whose name you don't want us to speak," I said softly.
The Andalite held his head high, but his tail sagged and dragged down to the grass. He
lowered his weapon. He was my brother. Did... did he die well? In battle?
Jake answered. "He died protecting us, and defying the Yeerks to the end. At the very last
moment he struck with every weapon he had."
The Andalite closed his main eyes for a brief moment. My brother was a great warrior. His
cousins loved him. His enemies feared him. No more can be said of any Andalite warrior.
I was surprised by what Jake said next. "I've lost a brother, too. He's one of them. A
Controller."
The Andalite opened his eyes. And you, human. Do you serve the Yeerks or fight them?
"I fight them. We fight them."
With what weapons? Do you have powerful weapons?
"Only the weapon your brother gave us," I said. "The power to morph."
60
Elfangor gave you that? It is never done! He seemed disturbed. The situation would have
to be very bad for him to give you morphing capability
"The situation is worse than you think," Marco said. "The Yeerks seem to know you're here.
Some piece of Andalite wreckage washed up on shore. They are up on the surface right now."
For the first time the Andalite seemed uncertain. What is your plan?
"To get you out of here and hide you," I said.
You came only to rescue me? This is true?
"Yes."
He smiled with his eyes, just as Prince Elfangor had done. You will be tired after this last
morph. You will need to rest.
"A little while, yes," I agreed.
"What is this?" Rachel asked. "This dome, I mean. It's like a park or something."
This is the main part of an Andalite dome ship. It is where we live. The engines and the war
bridge are in a long section that sticks out from the bottom, with this dome perched on top.
"Like a mushroom. Or an umbrella," I suggested.
The Andalite just looked blank.
"Never mind," I said.
During the great battle in orbit over your planet, the dome was separated from the rest of the
ship.
"Why?"
The Andalite dug at the grass with his fore- hoof.  I...I was too young for battle, by the laws
of our people. Besides, the rest of the ship maneuvers better without the dome.
"You're a kid? I mean, like a young person?" Marco asked.
Yes.
"Are you the only one left? The only Andalite here?"
Yes. I am alone. When the Blade ship appeared unexpectedly, they caught us off guard. I
saw the main section burn. Dracon beams damaged the orbital stabilization of this dome. It
fell. It splashed into the ocean and sank to the bottom. I have been here for these many
weeks, hoping that my cousins would come for me. Hoping that some survived. Finally I
risked sending out a mirrorwave call. It works by... He stopped, and looked embarrassed.
l am not supposed to explain Andalite technology. My brother will... He would have been
angry with me.
61
"Just you survived," I said sadly.
Just me, he said. No prince. No warriors.
I felt a sinking in the pit of my stomach. I think the others felt the same way. I guess we'd all
kind of been hoping this Andalite would be like the prince. A leader. Someone who could
take over the battle. Someone who would know more than we did.
"We're young, too," I said. "Too young to fight, according to the laws of our people."
But still you fight!
"We feel like we don't have a choice. Look, we don't even know your name. This is Jake,
Rachel, Marco. I'm Cassie. There's one more. His name is Tobias."
l am Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthil.
We all just kind of stared.
"Ax," Marco said. "Pleased to meet you."
Who is your prince?
One by one we looked at Jake.
"Oh, give me a break," Jake said. "I am not anyone's prince."
But the Andalite had stepped forward. He bowed his head and lowered his tail. I will fight
for you, Prince Jake, until I can return to my cousins.
62
CHAPTE R 19
This is a derrishoul tree, Ax said. He pointed to one of the asparagus-like spears that grew
straight and tall. He was showing us around while we recuperated from the morphing.
And that we call enos ermarf.
"What?" I didn't see what he was pointing at.
That. The way the lake curves forward into the grass, framed by derrishoul trees.
"You have a word for something like that?" I asked.
There are names for all the many ways the water and sky and field interact, he explained.
And for the way the suns and the moons hang in the sky of our planet, and cast their lights
in one way or another on the different aspects of the world.
Rachel caught my eye and silently mouthed the words, "He's cute." Then she winked.
I wasn't sure I agreed. Andalites are halfway between looking cute and looking scary. You
can get past the weird stalk eyes and the fact that they don't have mouths (at least not that you
can see), but that scorpion-like tail is far from cute. It reminded me of the sharks.
"You all live here?" Marco wondered. "I mean, just out in the open? Out on the grass?"
Where else would we live? Here we have space to run. There must always be space to run.
"This is like actually being on another planet," Jake marveled. "This is all like part of the
Andalite world."
Yes. We take our home with us into space. It angers the Yeerks, he added grimly.
"Why do they care what you take into space?" Marco asked.
lt is a part of everything they hate and would destroy if they could. The Yeerks would take
our world and make it as barren as their own. As they will to your planet unless they are
stopped.
I grabbed Ax's arm. "What... what are you saying? What do you mean about making the
planet barren?"
He turned his big eyes on me. The usual Yeerk pattern. Once a planet is under their control,
they alter it to suit their own desires. They will leave enough plant and animal species to keep
the host bodies fed - humans in the case of Earth - and the rest they eliminate.
He said it like it was obvious. Like it was just something I should know.
He started to move on, but I held his arm tightly. "Wait, wait. I don't think I understand you.
What do you mean, they eliminate species?"
63
They eliminate them. They will make Earth as much like the Yeerk home world as possible.
They will destroy most of the plants and all of the animal species except those they eat.
I let go of his arm. I rocked back and grabbed at the air for balance. I felt like I'd been hit by a
car. "No," I whispered. "That can't be. You're just saying that because you don't like Yeerks."
The others were staring. No one was moving.
Ax looked around at us. His eyes narrowed. Don't you know? Don't you know whom you're
fighting?
"We know they take over people's minds," Rachel said weakly.
Yes. And that is one of their great crimes. But the Yeerks are more than that. Yeerks are
killers of worlds. Murderers of all life. Hated and feared throughout the galaxy. They are a
plague that spreads from world to world, leaving nothing but desolation and slavery and
misery in their wake.
I felt cold. Small and weak and cold and afraid. I looked around, but even the inviting, lush
Andalite landscape did nothing to warm me. Up in the "sky" and all around us, I felt the im
mense pressure of the ocean, waiting to rush in.
There are only three races left in all the known galaxy that still fight the Yeerks, Ax said
proudly. And only the Andalites can stop them.
"How long until your people return to Earth?" I asked.
He hesitated. One of your years. Maybe two.
"Two years!" Jake looked stricken. I went to his side and slipped my arm through his. "Five
kids against an enemy that has destroyed half the galaxy? Five of us?"
Ax gave that smile, the one he did with his eyes. Six, my Prince, he said.
"Six. Well then," Marco said with grim sarcasm, "with six it shouldn't be any problem."
"How did these Yeerks get this far?" Rachel demanded. "How did this happen? If you
Andalites are so tough, why didn't you stop them a long time ago? How did a bunch of slugs
who live in dirty ponds manage to become so powerful?"
Ax looked at her. l am forbidden to tell certain things.
Rachel's eyes narrowed dangerously. "You're telling us all of planet Earth may be scheduled
for destruction and we are the only thing standing in the way, and you are going to keep
secrets? I don't think so."
The Andalite looked angry, but no angrier than Rachel.
"Look, um, I feel ready to morph again," I said, interrupting the tension. Rachel was angry
because she was afraid. What Ax had told us had shaken her. It had shaken all of us. I guess
64
we felt enough pressure already. We didn't really need to think that every living thing on the
planet was depending on us.
It was kind of a lot to handle.
"Cassie's right," Jake said. "It's time. Let's get going before it's too late."
I followed him along with the others as we crossed alien land, heading for an environment
just as alien - the ocean.
I wished I could forget what Ax told us. I wished I could stop seeing the pictures in my head
of an Earth without birds and trees. An Earth where the ocean was empty and dead.
Don't you know whom you're fighting? the Andalite had asked.
Yes.
Now I knew.
65
Chapter 20
"Hey, I have a stupid question," Marco said.
"What?" Jake asked.
Marco jerked his thumb toward the Andalite, Ax. "How do we get him out of here?"
Jake looked blank. "Um , Ax, I don't suppose you can swim? Swim really well, I mean. We're
a long, long way from land."
I would not swim in this body. I would morph a sea creature.
"Like what?" Marco asked bluntly. "We have to travel far and fast."
I have acquired a creature from this ocean. It was a large creature who swam close one day.
I stunned him and acquired him. I thought he would be useful if I was to escape.
"What kind of animal? What did he - " I stopped suddenly. I'd felt something. A shadow. I
looked up. Through the air of the dome. Through the clear dome itself and up through the
water.
It was on the surface. A cigar-shaped shadow riding the surface of the sea.
"That's a ship," I said. "Up there. I think it's stopped."
"Let's get out of here. Now," Jake snapped.
We ran for the hatch.
PING-NG-NG! PING-NG-NG!
The sound echoed through the dome.
"Sonar!" Marco hissed.
"How do you know?" Rachel asked.
"Didn't you ever see The Hunt for Red October? Great movie. Now let's leave. They've found
us!"
PING-NG-NG! PING-NG-NG!
We crammed inside the small hatch enclosure, the four of us and Ax.
"Morph!" Jake yelled.
I had already started. I could feel the dolphin features emerging. My friends were beginning
to mutate. Water rushed into the chamber, swirling up around our legs.
Ax was changing, too. It almost broke my concentration, watching him. In their normal forms
Andalites are strange enough. When they morph it is totally bizarre. Instead of two legs
66
shriveling and disappearing, it was four. And then there were the stalk eyes. And the tail,
which lost its scythe blade but split into a new kind of tail, with a long, raked, vertical blade
and a shorter lower blade.
The water swept up to my neck, but by that point I was more dolphin than human.
BA-BOOOOM!
The explosion shuddered through the dome. It rattled my teeth. I felt like my eardrums would
explode.
Yeerks, Ax said. He said the word in our heads the way his brother had. With hatred and
rage so deep it was impossible to comprehend it.
BA-BOOOOM!
A second explosion! Suddenly the exterior door opened and we swam out in a rush. Four
dolphins and one...
Shark!
I'd been distracted by the explosions.
Ax had morphed a shark.
 Oh , good choice, Ax, Marco said. You morphed a shark? 
Is it wrong? the Andalite wondered.
Your species and ours are mortal enemies, I explained.
 Oh. I have a lot to learn about Earth.
Here's the first lesson - let's get OUT OF HERE! Marco screamed.
I soared up through the water, angling toward the distant surface. But as I rose I looked
behind me. There were two jagged holes in the dome. Water was gushing in like Niagara
Falls. As I watched, a third dark cylinder was falling slowly from the surface. Even I had
seen enough sub marine movies to know it was a depth charge.
What hosts have these Yeerks used? Ax de manded urgently.
Um... Hosts? You mean bodies? Controllers? They use Hork-Bajir and humans, I
answered.
Hork-Bajir do not swim, Ax said. We may be safe. The Yeerks know little of deep
waters. They have no oceans on their world, only shallow pools.
Good, Jake said. All they've had here are Hork-Bajir. And Taxxons, of course.
Taxxons?
67
Yes, is that a problem?
We were near the surface now, just a dozen feet from the bright barrier of sea and sky.
Just then a larger, darker shadow swept over us. A shadow that was dark inside of dark. A
shadow that touched your soul. It skimmed just above the surface of the water.
It was shaped like a long battle-ax. Twin semi circular blades at the back, a long, diamondheaded
point at the front.
The Blade ship of Visser Three.
Something was falling from it as it passed over us. There were a dozen splashes. I rolled over
to get a better look.
What I saw made my flesh crawl.
Taxxons. In the water. Coming toward us.
Those nasty worms can swim? Marco yelled.
But the answer was obvious. The Taxxons, ten-foot-long centipedes bristling with dozens of
pairs of sharp needle legs, were racing after us. And they were very fast in the water.
Very fast.
From this angle we couldn't see the several red-jelly eyes. But we could see the circular
mouth at the top of each vile body.
I had seen Taxxons straining to catch bits of Prince Elfangor as Visser Three devoured him.
I had seen Taxxons, on orders from Visser Three, devour one of their own.
Tell me, Ax said. l have the feeling that this body I am in might be able to fight. Is this
true?
I grinned inwardly. Yes, Ax. Sharks can fight.
Then, Prince Jake, shall we deal with these Taxxon scum?
Don't call me 'prince,' Jake said. And the answer is yes. Let's go kick some Taxxon butt.
68
Chapter 21
There were a dozen Taxxons in the water. Five of us. Swimming in a straight line, the
Taxxons were faster. But, as we soon discovered, we were more maneuverable.
Pick a target, Jake said tersely.
I focused on one of the big worms. But I had to force myself into the fight. This was not a
shark, and the dolphin's instinctive dislike of sharks was not there to prod me.
I had to find the will to fight in my own, hu man mind. It's not such an easy thing. I had
fought the Yeerks to preserve human freedom. Now I fought to help the entire world. Still,
fighting doesn't come naturally to me.
And yet, I knew what I had to do. The Yeerks would show no mercy. If the Taxxons won, we
would be killed. Or worse.
I powered toward one of the Taxxons as he powered toward me. We were like two trains
running on the same track. Head to head.
At the last possible second, with the gaping red mouth of the Taxxon just a foot away, I
zoomed sideways, arched my back, and rammed the Taxxon's side.
I expected it to be like the shark - hard, tough, unyielding. It was not. It was like hitting a
soggy paper bag with a sledgehammer. The Taxxon burst like a dropped watermelon.
Aaaaarrrggghhh! I wanted to throw up. I beat the water with my tail and recoiled from the
horrible scene I had created.
All around me the battle raged. Dolphin against Taxxon. And Ax's shark against Taxxon.
Scientists believe that sharks are one of the oldest species of animals still in existence. Nature
built them as perfect predators. Perfect killing machines. Nature hasn't had to revise or update
them much. They were built right the first time.
Dolphins are very different. Scientists say that millions of years ago, dolphins were land
animals. Sea mammals not very different from humans and other mammals. They evolved
their way back into the ocean. Part of that evolution included learning to cope with predators
- with killer whales and sharks.
I don't know what sea the Taxxon race evolved in. I don't know what natural predators they
faced there. But they were not ready for this ocean. They were not ready to go one-on-one
with the masters of Earth's deep seas. They were no match for dolphin or shark.
 Okay , let's get out of here, Jake ordered. They've had enough.
Not so tough, are they? Rachel asked, trying to sound tough herself. But she seemed shaky
to me.
I shot to the surface and filled my lungs with warm evening air. The sun was dropping toward
the horizon. Two ships were close by and steaming in our direction.
69
But far worse was the Blade ship, which hovered now just a hundred yards up in the air.
We can't waste any more time, Marco said. The plan was to head back for one of those
little channel islands, unmorph, rest, and then take the rest of the distance. But even the
island is almost two hours away at top speed. We have to make a run for it, or we'll have to
choose between being trapped in morph or drowning. And that's not a great choice.
You're right, Marco, Jake said. Top speed for the nearest island.
How do you tell the time? Ax asked.
Sometimes we can carry a watch. Some times, like now, we just have to guess and hope for
the best.
 Oh. With your permission, I will keep track of the time.
You have a watch?
No, but I have the ability to keep track of time, Ax said.
Good enough, Marco said. How much time left?
We have been in morph for approximately thirty percent of the safe time.
Thirty percent? I tried to think. Math was never my best subject. And it's hard to be
mathematical when you've just come from a battle and are scared half to death. That would
be about thirty-six minutes. Which means we have an hour and twenty-four minutes left.
BAH-LUMPH!
I heard a huge concussion behind me. Like someone had dropped a big truck in the water.
What was that? Marco wondered.
Something hit the water, I said. Some thing big.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
 Okay , now what is that?  Rachel asked.
I rose to the surface to breathe and look around. The two surface ships were still closing in,
but they were not very fast, and they were not gaining on us. The Blade ship had disappeared.
I scanned the sky in all directions, but I couldn't see it.
Does anyone see the Blade ship? I asked.
No. But that doesn't mean it isn't still nearby, Jake said. lt may have recloaked.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
70
What is that?
Whatever it is, it's getting closer, I said.
Suddenly I remembered that I was not limited to the usual human senses. I fired off a rapid se
ries of echolocating clicks.
The picture that came back was startling.
 It's something in the water. Big. Huge. The size of a whale, but not moving like a whale.
Jake, Marco, and Rachel all echolocated.
 It's after us, whatever it is, Rachel said.
 It's big, it's fast, and it's after us, Marco agreed.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
I rose to breathe again and looked back. At just that moment I saw, far behind me, a huge,
dark red, almost purple hump above the water. It seemed to be covered with hundreds of
small fish tails, all beating frantically.
I went under. Ax, there's something back there. I don't think it's from Earth. I described it
to him, at least what I had seen of it.
Mardrut, Ax said.
Mardrut? What does that mean?
A mardrut is a beast that lives in the oceans of one of our own Andalite moons. To think of
that filthy Yeerk scum on our own moon! Acquiring our animals!
Ax, look, what is a mardrut? I asked him.
lt is a very large creature that swims by shooting water out of three large chambers. It makes
a sound - 
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
A sound like that? Marco asked.
Yes, Ax said. l guess so. I did not recognize it. I have only heard it once, and that was in
school, and I wasn't paying attentions
It almost made me laugh, the image of an Andalite classroom where Andalite students zoned
out on the lesson just like we did. But it really wasn't a good time for laughing.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
But this is no true mardrut, Ax said.
71
No, Jake agreed.
Then you know who and what is chasing us? Ax seemed surprised. You understand that
this is Visser Three in morph?
We've met before, Rachel said tersely.
You have fought Visser Three? And you still live? That definitely surprised the Andalite.
l honor you.
Yeah, swell, thanks, Marco said dryly. But I'd trade the honor for a good outboard engine
so I could outrun that evil creep.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
72
Chapter 22
The creature Visser Three had become did not tire.
We did.
I felt like I had been swimming forever. Half an hour into the chase, I was exhausted. We had
been powering through the water at panic speed. Fighting every current. Fighting the terrible
urge to rest as our tails weakened. Fighting the grow ing hunger.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
The mardrut never tired. It never weakened. It gained on us a foot at a time, bit by bit.
I could see it now. A huge purple-and-red mottled bag that undulated and oozed through the
water. It was propelled by the three huge water sacs, firing one after another. Between those
loud bursts, the hundreds of tiny tails that covered its entire surface thrashed and kept up
momentum.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
Then he spoke. We had all heard that silent voice in our heads before. It was like hearing the
most terrible curses. It was pure malice and hatred poured directly into our brains.
l am coming for you, brave Andalite warriors, Visser Three sneered. l am coming for
you.
That voice churned my insides. I felt my own hatred flaring up to match his. The images Ax
had painted - an Earth brown and empty and filled with nothing but the slaves of the Yeerks..
..
I had lived my entire life without feeling hatred. It is a sickening feeling. It burns and burns,
and sometimes you think it's a fire that will never go out.
l am coming for you. You will be mine. Shall I make you Controllers? Or shall I simply eat
you? The time for me to decide draws near. You weaken. Your time runs short.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
We had all been exposed to Visser Three. Ax had not. He seemed to shudder, even in his
shark body. The dead shark eyes showed no emotion, but his swimming became erratic.
Ax, I said to him. He did not answer. Ax, we have heard his voice before. We've heard
his threats. And we are still alive.
He will kill us, Ax said. He will kill us! He killed Elfangor!
Ax, hang in there. Don't answer him. Don't think about him. Just swim!
But Ax's fear was catching. He was right. We didn't have enough time to make it to land
without being trapped in our dolphin bodies. And we would never escape him, anyway. I
glanced back.
73
He was only five body lengths away!
I demanded still more from my burning muscles, but there was nothing more to ask.
This is the end, Cassie, I told myself. This is the end.
I felt the terrible hatred surge in me again. But I didn't want to end my life that way. I would
not die with hate in my heart. That would be one victory I could deny Visser Three.
I let my mind drift, even as my shattered body struggled to go on. I felt my mind floating
back. To the barn, and all the animals there. To my father, my mother. To Jake.
I remembered good things. Riding the high thermals with Tobias and the others with wings
spread wide. Good days. Sitting at my grand mother's feet as she told me the story of our
family, of all the generations who had lived on and worked the farm.
And then a more recent memory surfaced. The whale. I remembered his huge, gentle silence
filling my mind.
I could even hear his song.
Wait! I could hear his song. That wasn't memory. I was hearing his plaintive, haunting song,
reverberating through the water.
He was not far away.
I opened my mind and let my human consciousness slip away. I let go. I invited the dolphin
mind - the mind that loved to play and loved to fight and loved the feeling of soaring out of
the water right up into the air like a bird - to surface in my head.
I fired echolocating bursts, a thousand quick clicks compressed into a few seconds. And more
than that, I cried for help.
It was foolish. It was ridiculous. But I cried out in a silent plea, like a child with a nightmare
calling for her mother.
The monster is after me! The destroyer! The evil one!
Help me.
We have used eighty percent of our time, Ax managed to say.
Twenty-four minutes left, Marco gasped.
lt doesn't matter. I'm done for, Rachel admitted. l can't keep going. And he's too close. It's
time to turn and fight.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
We cannot possibly win, Ax said.
74
We know, Jake said. But if I have to lose, I'd rather lose fighting than let him catch us
one by one.
That is a very Andalite thing to say, Ax said. We have a lot in common. I wish it had
ended differently.
On the count of three, Jake said.
One.
Two.
Let's go.
We stopped. We turned to face the mardrut.
Jake? I said. l wanted to tell you...
Yes. Me, too, Cassie, he said.
WHUMP, WHUMP, WHUMP.
The red-and-purple behemoth rushed at us.
I shook with terror. But I was too tired to swim away.
Help me! I cried one last time. But I knew there was no one to help.
And then I let it all go...
... and said good-bye.
75
Chapter 23
I' ve made up my mind what to do with you, Visser Three said. After this long chase I am
really quite hungry.
He rushed at us.
We rushed at him.
Something dark came hurtling up from the ocean floor.
Something dark and long and bigger even than the mardrut.
FWOOOMP!
Visser Three shuddered and stopped dead in the water.
A second dark shape, as fast as the first.
FWOOOMP!
The great ones, I whispered.
 It's the whales! Marco yelled.
There were five of them in the water.
The two big males who had struck first had heads like sledgehammers. Sperm whales. Sixty
feet long. Sixty-five tons. The weight of fifty cars.
They had dived deep and come tearing up at awesome velocity to slam into the creature from
another world's ocean.
The mardrut was big. The mardrut was strong. But nothing living can survive for long, being
slammed by creatures weighing a hundred and thirty thousand pounds.
Then, the whale - my whale, because that's how I thought of him - began to lash the mardrut
with his tail. Hammer blows. Hits that could have knocked walls down. Again and again, as
two smaller females joined in and the two sperm whales circled back for another attack.
Rrraaaggghhhh! Visser Three's cry of pain and fury echoed in my brain.
He's retreating! Jake crowed.
He's running! Rachel said. Hah-hah!
I don't think Visser Three likes whales very much, Marco yelled. I don't think he likes
them at all!
The whales chased him for a while, but they let him go in the end.
76
Whales are not very good at killing. They don't really have much of a talent for hating and
destroying.
My whale, the big humpback, returned in a few minutes and rested in the water beside me.
I wanted to thank him, but, as I said, whales don't think in human words or human thoughts.
Still, I tried, anyway.
Thanks, big guy.
People who argue about how smart whales are, or whether they are as smart as humans, kind
of miss the point. Whales will never read books or build rockets or do algebra. In all those
areas, humans are smarter.
Humans are the great brains of planet Earth.
But it isn't necessary to believe whales are as smart as humans to believe that they are great.
They don't have to know words to sing songs. They don't have to be anything but what they
are to be magnificent. And even though I don't really know what a soul is, I know this - if
humans have them, then so do whales.
I wanted to thank him for responding to my call for help. But I had a strange feeling, as he
opened his great heart to the dolphin mind that was in my own, that he hadn't just come in
response to me.
I had the feeling - and that's all it was, a feeling - that in some way the sea itself had called
him to respond to the presence of an abomination.
Of course I never told that to Jake or any of the others. They would have laughed. At least,
Marco would have.
Morph time is almost up, Ax said.
l think if we morph, the whale will carry us until we are ready to morph again, I said.
So we morphed back to our human bodies, and Ax morphed to his Andalite body, and we
crawled up on the whale's huge back.
I fell asleep. I know that sounds pretty incredible, but I did. I was exhausted. Physically.
Emotionally. In every way you can be tired, I was tired.
When I woke up, it was sunset. We were near shore. I could see the beach, and just a little
farther down the shore, the mouth of the river.
We were wet, of course, covered with splash ing water and the spray from the whale's blow
hole. It was a little cold, especially now that the sun was going down.
But then again, I wasn't Visser Three's lunch, so I wasn't going to complain.
Jake was sitting cross-legged on the whale's back, smiling at me.
77
"Some day, huh?" he said.
I smiled. "Yeah."
"We did it. We saved the Andalite. And we got out alive."
"Barely," I said.
"You know something? You were right. You trusted your feelings and we followed you and
we're all safe."
I nodded. "Yes, I guess so. Only... as Marco would say, let's not do this again any time soon,
okay?"
Jake smiled his slow smile. "It's fun being a dolphin, though, isn't it? I know you were
worried about it. You know, thinking maybe it wasn't right and all."
I shook my head slowly. "I'm still not sure it's right. But I guess we don't have much of a
choice. The Yeerks started this fight, not us. And after what Ax said... I guess it's not just
about one species, human beings. It's about all the animals. It's about all of Earth."
Jake nodded. "I think if you could ask the dolphins, they would say it's all right to use them.
Since what you're trying to do is save them."
"Nah, they would just think it was all a big game. They would never understand."
We both laughed. Even if they could talk, the dolphins would never really understand what
we were so upset about. We knew that better than anyone.
"I guess that's true," Jake said. "But we do understand." He met my gaze. "We do understand
what's at stake. And we'll do whatever we have to do to win."
I knew what he was trying to tell me. We'd used the dolphins to save them. We'd used other
animals to save them, too. And that made it okay.
78
Chapter 24
W e morphed once more into our dolphin bodies and swam down the river to the place where
we had entered the water. We beached ourselves in shallow water and returned to our human
bodies.
"It feels good to be human again," Jake said.
Marco said, "Oh, Jake, you were never exactly human to begin with."
I guess it was funny, but we were all too tired to laugh.
We dug our clothes and shoes out of their hid ing place. I pulled jeans and a sweatshirt on
over my wet morphing suit. I shoved muddy feet into my boots.
Strange, Ax said, watching us very closely.
What is the meaning of the things you place on your bodies?
"It's clothing," Rachel explained.
Why do you wear it? Does it protect you from the environment?
"Yes. That, plus the fact that people get very upset if you walk around naked," Marco
answered.
There was a fluttering overhead. One of the shadowed branches dipped with a sudden weight.
"Is that you, Tobias?" I asked.
Yes. You... you found an Andalite!
"Yes. Tobias, meet Ax. That's his nickname, anyway. Ax, meet Tobias. Tobias is one of us."
Sort of, anyway, Tobias said dryly. l liked this morph so much I moved in permanently.
The Andalite was shocked. You were trapped?
Yes.
Ax turned his eyes on me, then looked from each one of us to the next. He seemed very
solemn. You have paid a price for the gift of my brother, Elfangor.
Prince Elfangor was your brother? Tobias demanded. His hawk's eyes glittered. l was
with him at the end.
"This is all fine," Jake interrupted, "but we have to get out of here. And we have to decide
what to do with Ax. He can't exactly just go walk ing through town with us."
"I think he should come to my farm," I said. "It's not so different from the dome ship. Fields,
meadows, woods, all the way into the national forest land. He'd have to be careful, but it's the
only place we have to hide him."
79
"That still doesn't deal with how we're going to get him there," Marco pointed out. "It's a long
walk. People are gonna notice a big blue deer with extra eyes and a scorpion tail."
I must morph, Ax said.
"Yeah, but into what?" Rachel wondered.
Then, to my surprise, Ax walked over to me. He placed one delicate, many-fingered hand on
my face.
With your permission he said.
I felt myself getting spacey. Not sleepy, exactly, but sort of like I was in a trance.
I realized what he was doing. He was "acquiring" me. He was absorbing my DNA.
"Urn... excuse me, but you're going to morph Cassie?" Marco asked. "Can you do that?"
Ax went to Marco and touched his face. One by one, Ax acquired each of us.
And then he began to morph.
I've seen a lot of strange morphings. But nothing was ever like this. Ax wasn't becoming an
animal. He was becoming a human being.
But a human being we all knew, in some ways. A melding of the four human Animorphs.
His front legs began to shrivel away. His back legs thickened and strengthened. Suddenly a
mouth appeared in his Andalite face.
The scorpion tail shrank and disappeared.
He reared up and stood erect.
"Urn, you know, I think we better give Ax some privacy," I suggested.
"Is he going to be a boy or a girl?" Marco wondered.
"Either way, let's turn our heads," I said.
We did. Probably just in time.
"Hey, Ax? In the pile of clothes there is an extra pair of boxers and a T-shirt," Jake said. "Put
them on, okay?"
A few minutes later we turned around. We all stared.
Ax had the T-shirt pulled up like a baggy pair of shorts. The boxers were on his head.
" O -o-o-o-kay," Jake said. "A few small adjust ments needed. Ax, are you male or female?"
80
"I chose to be-be-be-be-be male." He stopped suddenly, eyes wide. He was surprised by his
mouth. It was not something Andalites understood.
"I chose male because I am male. Word. Male. Is that a good choice? Ch-oy-ce? Chuh chuh
choy-yuss?" He twisted his lips around and stuck out his tongue. "Strange," he said.
"Male is fine," Jake said. "Rachel? Cassie?
Turn around. Marco and I will help Ax adjust his clothing."
When I looked again, Ax was dressed normally.
But he did not look normal. He was of medium height, a perfect balance between Rachel and
Marco. He was of medium build, somewhere between Jake and Marco. His hair was brown,
with just a little of Rachel's gold and a little of my curl. His skin was the color of light brown
sugar, a blending of my brown and Marco's olive, and Jake and Rachel's pale white.
He was human and yet, somehow, strange.
He jerked his head this way and that. "How do you look? Lookuh. LooKUH. KUH. How do
you look around? Ound. Ow, ow, ownd behind?"
I grinned. It was exactly like every time I first morphed a new animal. He was getting used to
his new body. Or at least trying to. As I watched him play with his lips and try out new
sounds, he suddenly tumbled forward.
Jake grabbed him and held him.
"You only have two legs now, Ax," he said.
"Yes. Two. Oo. Very shaky."
"Yeah, we're a shaky species," Marco said.
"Well, let's get out of here," Jake said.
"Ax?" I said. "Don't talk to any strangers on the way home, okay?"
81
Chapter 25
It was a couple of days later. After we had recovered. After I had made sure that Ax was safe
in the far fields of our farm, away from curious eyes.
I waited till dark, and changed again into the seagull morph.
I flew out of my barn and through the night to The Gardens.
It was closed and empty, aside from a few scattered security guards. They would have
stopped me if I had tried to enter normally. But no one was looking out for seagulls.
I landed near the dolphin tank and became human again. There were no lights on and just a
sliver of moon, but I could hear the dolphins swimming. One came over to me, curious about
why a human would be hanging around at night.
"Hi," I said. "Sorry, I don't have any food for you."
Then I climbed up on the side of the tank. I let myself go, slipping into the cool water.
Three of the dolphins came over to take a look. This was definitely something unusual. Some
strange human was getting in the pool with them. This was a new game.
I began to morph.
This definitely got their attention. All six dolphins swam around, looking up at me, sideways
at me, back at me as they passed.
And slowly I became one of them.
It was a dumb thing to do, really. I knew it was dumb. But it felt like something I had to do.
I wanted to show them what I had done. I wanted their permission to become one of them. I
wanted to find some way to tell them... every thing.
But you know, once I was in that dolphin body again, it was hard to remember all my solemn
worries. It was hard to remember why I had come.
Hard to remember fear and worry and guilt.
One of them came over, gave me a nudge, then shot toward the surface. She exploded into
the air and fell back, as silent and smooth as an arrow.
They were asking me to play.
They were asking me to dance with them.
And so I did.




Chapter 1
My name is Marco.
I can't tell you my last name or where I live. Believe me, I wish I could. I would like nothing
more than to be able to tell you my name is Marco Jones or Williams or Vasquez or Brown or
Anderson or McCain.
Marco McCain. Has kind of a nice sound, doesn't it?
But McCain's not my last name. I'm not even going to swear to you that Marco is my first
name. See, I'm hoping to live awhile longer. I'm not going to make it any easier for the
Yeerks to find me.
I live in a paranoid world. But just because I'm paranoid doesn't mean I don't have enemies.
I have real enemies. Enemies that would freeze your blood if you only knew.
So, see, I'd like to tell you my name, and address, and phone number, too, because if I could
do that, it would mean I no longer had any enemies. It would mean my life was normal again.
It would mean I could go back to minding my own business.
I believe in minding my own business.
Which is why what happened on my way home from the 7-Eleven was so dumb.
I was walking down the street with some low-fat milk, a loaf of bread, and a bag of peanut
M&M's. Since my mom died, I've gotten stuck with a lot of the shopping and stuff for my
dad and me.
This 7-Eleven isn't in the greatest neighborhood, so I was walking kind of fast, minding my
own business, trying not to think about the fact that it was after ten at night.
Then I heard it.
"Just don't hurt me, just don't hurt me."
It was a man's voice. An old man, from the sound of it. It was coming from a dark alley.
I hesitated. I stopped. I pressed myself back against the cold brick wall of the building and
listened.
"Just gimme the money, old man, don't make me hurt you," a second voice said. A younger
voice. A tough voice.
"I gave you all of it!" the old man cried.
Then the punk said something I can't repeat. Basically, he was getting ready to pound the old
man. I heard other voices. Three punks total. It didn't look good for the old man.
"This is totally not your problem, Marco," I told myself. "Stay out of it. Don't be an idiot."
3
Three punks. Each of them probably twice as big as I was. I'm not exactly Arnold
Schwarzenegger. I'm not even average height for my age, although I make up for it by being
incredibly cute.
And charming. And witty. And modest.
But I was pretty sure the three big gang members in that alley were not going to be very
impressed by my cuteness.
Fortunately, I have other abilities.
It had been a while since I had done this particular morph, but as I concentrated, I could feel
it coming back. I slipped into the opening of the alley and hid in the shadow of a very smelly
Dumpster.
The first thing that happened was the fur. It sprouted quickly from my arms and legs and all
down my body. Thick, rough, ragged, black fur. It grew long on my arms and back and head.
It was shorter everywhere else.
My jaw bulged forward. I could hear the bones in my jaw grind as they stretched and the
nonhuman DNA changed my body.
Morphing doesn't hurt. It creeps you out some times, but it doesn't hurt. And as morphs go,
this one wasn't bad. I mean, I still got to keep all my usual arms and legs and stuff. Not like
when I morphed into an osprey. Or a dolphin. I mean, when I was a dolphin, I was breathing
through a hole in the back of my neck.
With this morph I had arms, as usual. Only they were a lot bigger. A lot bigger. My legs bent
forward. My shoulders grew so massive it was like having a couple of pigs sitting on my
back. I also had an enormous round belly and a leathery chest.
My face was a black, bulging, rubbery mask, and my eyes were practically invisible beneath
my heavy brow.
I had become a gorilla.
Now, here's the thing about gorillas. They are the sweetest animals around. If you leave them
alone they will mostly just sit and eat leaves all day.
And that's all the gorilla mind really wanted to do right then - eat some leaves, maybe a nice
piece of fruit.
But I was in that head, too, along with the gorilla's instincts. And I had decided to teach those
punks a little lesson. See, now that I was in that gorilla body, I weighed four hundred pounds.
And I was mighty strong.
How strong? Let me put it this way. Compared to a gorilla, a human being is made out of
toothpicks. I wasn't just twice as strong as a man, I was maybe four, five, six times stronger.
Further down the alley, the punks had lost patience with the old man.
4
"Let's just kick his butt," one of the geniuses said.
That's when I decided to say hello. To get their attention, I picked up the Dumpster and threw
it against the far wall of the alley.
Yes, a full-sized Dumpster.
CRASH! BOOM!
"What was that?"
"Look! What is that thing?"
"Whoa! That's some kind of a... of a monkey!"
Monkey! I thought. Excuse me? Monkey? I'll show you monkey.
Before they could decide what to do, I charged. Knuckles scraping the dirty ground, small
hind legs propelling me forward, I charged.
If the punks had had any sense, they would have run.
They didn't.
"Get it! "one yelled.
I grabbed him around his arm with one massive fist. I lifted him straight off the ground and
threw him over my shoulder.
"Aaaaaaahhhhh!"
BOOMPH!
He landed on the ground behind me. The other two rushed at me, one on the left, one on the
right. I saw a knife glittering. The knife slashed my arm. It almost hurt.
"Hoo hoo hrrraaawwwrr!" I yelled, in pure gorilla.
With my injured arm, I landed a backhand blow to the knife guy's chest. He flew back. I
mean, flew. He hit the wall and dropped.
I just grabbed the third guy by the shirt collar and threw him into the Dumpster.
"Don't kill meeeee!" he cried as he sailed through the air.
I had no intention of killing anyone. I hoisted the knife guy into the Dumpster with his friend.
He wasn't breathing real well, but I figured he'd survive.
Hah, I thought. Who needs Spiderman, when Marco is on the case?
While I was telling myself just how cool I was, I heard the sound.
5
It was a click. Two clicks, actually. The sound of an automatic pistol being cocked.
I spun around.
BLAM!BLAM!
It was the first guy. The one I'd thrown over my shoulder. He was up on his feet, gun pointed.
I was big. I was powerful. But a gun was a whole different story. And loud! Man, are those
things loud.
"Hah! Come and get some, monkey man!"
I barreled behind the Dumpster. I leaned my massive shoulders into it and sent it rolling and
spinning and sliding at the guy with the gun.
"Ahhhhh!"
BLAMPH!
So much for the guy with the gun.
I checked. He was alive. He wasn't happy, but he was alive. The gun was nowhere to be seen.
Well, Marco, I thought, that went okay. Now, find someplace private, demorph, call 911 to
come arrest these guys, and you can still get home in time to watch Letterman.
Unfortunately, I had forgotten one thing.
"G-g-get out of here you... you monster!"
The old man. The one I had risked my life to save. He was standing, facing me. He was
shaking with fear and red in the face.
Oh, I thought. So that's where the gun went.
The old man was pointing the gun at me.
"Back, you demon! Don't come any closer."
BLAM! BLAM! BLAM!
I tore out of the alley with bullets whizzing through the air.
Which just goes to show you why you should never get involved in other people's problems.
6
Chapter 2
Yeah , so then I do the gorilla thing, right? I save the old man. I'm the hero. I am Spiderman.
I am Wolverine. I am Batman - "
"Or at least Gorilla Boy," Rachel interrupted.
She did a forward flip as we walked across the springy grass. Rachel's into gymnastics. It's
very distracting when someone flips while they're talk ing to you.
It was the day after my big hero act. We were all out in a far meadow of Cassie's farm - me,
Jake, Cassie, and Rachel, strolling through little bunches of wildflowers. Tobias was flying
overhead, about a hundred feet up, in a sky dotted with bright, white clouds.
"And what happens as I am playing Captain America?" I ask. "The old man unloads the gun
at me. I totally lost the milk and my bag of M&M's."
Jake gave me a disgruntled look. "Marco? It was good of you to rescue the old man. But you
really shouldn't be turning into a gorilla."
Now, as you're reading this, you're probably thinking, Urn, Marco? Time out. You've left out
a few things. Like, how can you turn into a gorilla?
Good question.
It happened on a dark night when we were all heading home from the mall. There were five
of us.
Me, you already know.
Jake is my best friend, even though, unfortunately, he is kind of a pain sometimes. He's one
of those serious-type guys. You say the word "responsibility" and he snaps to attention. He's
the kind of guy who always seems like he's bigger than he actually is. That's because he has
that whole "I'm in charge, and you can trust me" thing going on. He has sensible brown hair,
and trustworthy brown eyes, and one of those confident chins.
He also has a great sense of humor and is very smart, and I would trust him with my life any
day, any time. Not that I would ever tell him that.
Then there's Cassie. I didn't really know her very well back then. But I think she's kind of
Jake's girlfriend now. Of course, no one is supposed to know this. Ssshhh! Big secret!
Cassie is the one who is least like me. If I'm comedy, she's poetry. She's a natural
peacemaker. She's the one who knows when you're feeling bad and will find something nice
to say that makes you feel better. And it's not like she's manipulating. She really cares about
things. She's like sincere or something.
Cassie is our animal expert. Her parents are both vets and she spends most of her free time
helping her dad run the Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic. It's in the barn at their farm. They save
injured woodchucks and deer and eagles and so on. Cassie actually knows how to get an
injured, angry wolf to take its pills. (Not an easy thing. Believe me. I was a wolf once.)
7
You go out to her barn and you'll see this lit tle, short, black girl in overalls and boots with
her arm halfway down the throat of a wolf that could just bite it right off. And she'll be
smiling and acting like it's no big deal. And the wolf will be just standing there, looking like
he's trying to earn a gold star for being the best little boy in school.
Then there's Rachel. Very beautiful. Very leggy-blond-supermodel type. Ms. Fashion. Ms.
Properly-Applied-Makeup. Ms. Has-It-All - Looks- and -Brains.
Rachel is Jake's cousin, and a total babe who, unfortunately, is also totally insane. See,
somehow, underneath all that perfect hair and perfect teeth, there's this lunatic Amazon
warrior-queen, just fighting to get out.
Here's what Rachel'll say whenever we decide to do something so dangerous it makes you
want to wet yourself: "I'm in! Let's go! Let's do it!"
I swear that, if she could, Rachel would be wearing a suit of armor and swinging a sword.
And it would be a fashionable suit of armor, and she would look great in it.
Then there is Tobias. That night in the construction site, he was just this kind of dweeby kid I
barely knew. He liked Jake because Jake once kept some guys from beating him up.
To be honest with you, I don't even remember what Tobias looked like back then. Now, of
course, he looks like a fierce, angry bird of prey.
There's a downside to the morphing power we have. A time limit of two hours. Stay more
than two hours in a morph, and you stay forever.
That's why Tobias was flying overhead, with his wide wings catching the warm updrafts.
Tobias is a hawk. A red-tail hawk, to be exact. I guess he always will be.
I tease Tobias sometimes.
What happened to him scares me.
Anyway, on that night we were cutting through this big, abandoned construction site. It was
supposed to be a shopping center, but they got it half built and then stopped.
Then, to make a long story short, there was this spaceship. It was carrying an Andalite who
was dying of wounds he'd gotten fighting the Yeerks up in Earth orbit. Or thereabouts.
He's the one who told us about the Yeerks. The Yeerks are parasites. They use the bodies of
other species. They take them over. They control them. That's what you call a human who's
been taken over - a Controller. A human Controller.
Jake's brother, Tom, is one. A Controller.
And Melissa, Rachel's friend, her father is one, too.
The Andalites fight the Yeerks. They had been trying to stop the secret Yeerk invasion of
Earth, but basically they got their butts kicked. Before he died, the Andalite promised us that
8
reinforcements would come. Eventually. In the meantime, all he could do for us was give us a
weapon.
That weapon was the power to morph. To ac quire the DNA of any animal we could touch,
and then to become that animal.
So that was the deal. The five of us, five regular everyday kids, were supposed to fight the
Yeerks until the Andalites came along and rescued us.
Five kids versus the Yeerks. The Yeerks, who had already conquered the terrifying HorkBajir
and made them into Controllers. The Yeerks, with their creepy allies, the TaxxonControllers.
The Yeerks who had already infiltrated human society, making Controllers out
of cops and teachers and soldiers and mayors and TV newspeople. They were everywhere.
They could be anyone.
And all we had was five kids who could turn into birds.
Or gorillas.
"I just don't think we should be morphing out on the street in order to get involved in
everyday crimes," Jake lectured me. "Remember what happened at the used car lot with
Rachel and Tobias - and you asked them if they were insane!"
I was about to argue when Rachel spoke up again.
"I think Marco did the right thing," she said. "What was he supposed to do? Just walk away?
I don't think so."
"Okay, now I know I was wrong," I said. "Any time Rachel thinks I did the right thing, it has
to be wrong. Besides, that was my whole point. I risked my life for that old man, and I don't
even get a thank you."
"I don't know if it was a good idea," Cassie said, "but the feeling behind it was good. I think
it was heroic."
Well, what could I say to that? It's very hard to disagree with someone who has just called
you a hero.
Jake decided to let it go. Unfortunately, the reason he decided to drop it was that he had
something bigger to talk about.
He got his serious look.
I groaned. I hate that serious look. It always means trouble.
"Jake? Are you going to tell me why we're all out walking in the fields together? Aside from
the fact that it's a nice day and all?"
"We're going to see Ax," Jake explained. "Cassie and I have been talking to him the last
couple days. You know, about what he wants to do."
9
"Uh-oh," I muttered. "I just know I'm not going to like this."
"Well... probably not. Ax wants to go home," Jake said.
"Home?" Rachel repeated.
"To the Andalite home world," Cassie said.
Ax, whose real name is Aximili-Esgarrouth- Isthil, is an Andalite.
I stopped walking. The others stopped, too. "Urn, excuse me, but isn't the Andalite home
world kind of far away?"
"Ax says it's about eighty-two light years," Jake confirmed.
"Light travels about one hundred and eighty-six thousand miles per second," I pointed out.
"Times sixty seconds per minute. Times sixty minutes per hour. Times twenty-four hours per
day. Times three hundred and sixty-five days per year. That's one light year. Times eightytwo
years."
Rachel laughed. "So you have been staying awake in science class, Marco."
"We tried to figure it out in miles. But none of our calculators go that high," Jake said.
"You know, Jake, I could be wrong, but I don't think any of the major airlines fly to the
Andalite home world," I said.
"Uh-huh," he said with a nod. "I know. That's why we'll have to steal a Yeerk spaceship."
"There he is," Cassie said.
I followed the direction of her gaze. Over toward the line of trees at the edge of the field, I
saw him.
Ax.
The Andalite.
From a distance you'd think he was a small horse or a deer. He has four hooved feet that flash
with amazing speed. His upper body looks like a horse's neck and head, except that when he
gets close enough, you see that he has two smaller, human-sized arms sticking out.
His head is kind of a triangle, with two huge, almond-shaped eyes. Those are his main eyes.
There are two extra eyes, each stuck atop a sort of stalk. The stalks stick out of the top of his
head and move, pointing the extra eyes in any direction.
But the thing that really makes you stare is the tail.
According to Cassie and Rachel, Ax is cute. I wouldn't know, being a guy. All I know is,
when you see that tail, you know right away that Andalites aren't exactly cuddly koala bears
or puppies.
10
The Andalite tail resembles a scorpion's tail. It curls up and over, and is armed with a wicked
scythe blade. They can strike with those tails faster than your eye can see.
I'd seen the first Andalite do it. In the seconds before the evil creature known as Visser Three
murdered the Andalite prince, he had struck with that tail again and again.
That memory came back to me as I watched Ax galloping toward us, tail arched and ready.
"I hope there's no one around," Jake said anxiously. He scanned the area. It was pretty
remote. Cassie's house and barn were way out of sight. And there was no reason why anyone
would be in this distant field.
I looked up and saw Tobias's reddish tail feathers. I gave him a wave.
All clear, Tobias called down to us in thought-speak. There's some people having a
picnic, but that's a couple miles from here.
Ax came galloping up. Prince Jake! he said, also in thought-speak.
Jake groaned. Ax had gotten it into his head that Jake was our leader, which was partly true.
And I guess for an Andalite, any leader is some kind of prince.
Ax has no mouth. No one had asked him yet how he ate with no mouth.
He communicates by thought-speech. It's the same way we communicate when we're
morphed. For us humans it only works when we're morphed. For Andalites, it's the normal
way to communicate.
"Hi, Ax," Jake said, as the Andalite came to a skidding stop just a few feet from us. "How are
you doing?"
l am well. And each of you?
"I'm fine," Cassie said.
Tobias swooped down out of the sky. He braked and landed neatly on the grass.
"I'm fine, too, Ax," I said. "Or at least I was until I heard someone say something really
stupid."
Ax looked uncertain. He swiveled one of his stalk eyes forward to get a better look at me.
What stupid thing was said?
"Someone said we were going to try and steal a Yeerk spaceship," I said.
He smiled an Andalite smile, which is hard to describe, except that it involves his main eyes.
You think it will be dangerous?
11
"Dangerous? No, jumping off a ten-story building is dangerous. Sticking your tongue in an
electrical socket is dangerous - not to mention painful. But stealing a Yeerk ship is beyond
dangerous."
The higher the danger, the higher the honor, Ax said. Is this not true?
I gave Rachel a sidelong look. "I think we've found your future husband."
"It may be honorable to try and get a Yeerk ship, Ax," Jake said, "but honor isn't our most
important goal."
The Andalite looked surprised - I think. His main eyes widened, and his stalk eyes stretched
up to their maximum height. It looked like surprise to me.
What else do you fight for, if not honor?
Jake shrugged. "Look, we're trying to do whatever we can to hurt the Yeerks. But we're also
trying to stay alive. We're all there is. I mean, no one else even knows there is a Yeerk
invasion. So if something happens to us..." He let it hang.
l did not mean to offend, Ax said. You are right, of course. You are alone. If you fail, all
is lost.
"So the question is whether this is something we can do without getting killed," Jake pointed
out.
"Yeah, we're mostly against the idea of getting killed," I added. "So how are we supposed to
grab a Yeerk ship? They're up in orbit. We're down here. It's not like we can call them up and
ask them to come down."
Yes, we can do that, Ax said.
"What?"
We can call them.
"Right."
I can create a Yeerk distress beacon. They will send a ship to investigate.
"You mean like, 'Hello? Hello? Is this Visser Three? Could you send a ship down to pick me
up?'" I said.
I expected everyone to laugh because the idea was so totally ridiculous. No one laughed.
"Um, excuse me?" I said, trying again. "Personally, I have had plenty of Visser Three in my
life. I don't need to call him on the phone."
lt will not involve that... that foul beast, Ax said.
12
That was one thing I liked about Ax. He hated Visser Three. He reminded me of the Andalite
prince, who was Ax's older brother. When either of them said the word "Yeerk," let alone
"Visser Three," you could just feel the air vibrating from their anger.
lt will be a minor matter, Ax said. They will hear a distress beacon and send a Bug
fighter to investigates
"There is always at least one Hork-Bajir and one Taxxon aboard each Bug fighter," I pointed
out. "Anytime you start playing with Hork-Bajirs, it's not a minor thing."
Do you fear them? Ax demanded. He stared at me with all four eyes.
"You better believe I fear them."
Fear is unworthy of a warrior.
He seemed a little too determined for me. I don't know much about Andalites, but I had a
feeling I understood this one, at least a little. See, he was alive. But every other Andalite who
had come to Earth, including Ax's brother, the prince, was dead.
So I took a shot. It wasn't fair, maybe, but he'd made me mad, acting like I was some kind of
coward. "How many times have you fought Hork-Bajir? Or any other Controller?" I asked
him.
His stalk eyes drooped. He pawed the ground with one hoof. Never, he said.
I nodded. "I thought so. So let me tell you something, Ax. It's scary. It's so scary that some
times you wish you could just go ahead and die because it's easier than dealing with the
terror."
Well, I thought as I looked around at my friends, that pretty well killed everyone's happy
mood.
It was Tobias who broke the silence. If you get a Yeerk ship, can you get back to the
Andalite home world?
Ax seemed abashed, but he answered, Yes. I hope so.
And if you make it, can you do anything to hurry your people up? To get them back here
quicker?
I am young. Like you. But I am the brother of Prince Elfangor. My people will listen to me.
I... I know that they will come, either way. But yes, perhaps if I can return and tell them how
desperate your situation is...
Jake took a deep breath. "Okay. Time for a vote."
I groaned. I already knew what it would be.
13
Chapter 3
Okay , ready?" I asked.
Yes. I am prepared to begin the morph, Ax said.
It was Saturday. A couple of days after we had all agreed to go ahead with the plan to capture
a Yeerk ship. We were in Cassie's barn, surrounded by cages full of injured animals and
birds. Cassie's father and mother were both away for the day.
Jake checked his watch. "Ten after ten," he reported.
"Ax starts morphing at ten-twelve and is done by ten-fifteen. The bus will be at the stop at ten
twenty-five," I said. "It will arrive at the mall at eleven. By that point Ax will have been in
morph for forty-five minutes. That leaves an hour and fifteen minutes on the two-hour morph
time."
"Is it enough time?" Cassie wondered. She was biting her lip nervously.
I shrugged. "Thirty minutes to reach Radio Shack, find what Ax needs to make his
transmitter, buy it and get back to catch the eleven-thirty bus home. That gets back here at
five after twelve. Ten minutes to spare."
Jake was looking pretty stony-faced, which is how he looks when he's not sure if something
will work.
"It's the best we can do," I said.
"I know. Everyone ready?" Jake asked.
"I should go with you guys," Rachel said for like the tenth time that morning. "I should be
there."
"No. We can't all go. If something goes wrong, we don't want everyone caught at once," I
said. "And something is sure to go wrong."
Why do you say that?! Ax demanded sharply.
Jake smiled. "Marco doesn't believe in optimism."
Tobias flew almost silently into the barn through the open hayloft. It's still all clear. And the
bus is right on schedule, over on Margolis Avenue.
"Okay, Ax. Time to morph," Jake said.
"And, um, don't forget the morphing outfit, okay?" I reminded him. The concept of clothing
kind of puzzled the Andalite. We'd gotten him skintight bike shorts and a T-shirt that he
could use for morphing, but he still didn't know why.
It's one of the most annoying things about morphing - dealing with clothing. We'd learned
how to morph clothing, but only things that were real tight-fitting. Any time you tried to
morph a jacket or sweater they just ended up shredded. And shoes? Forget about shoes.
14
Clothing, yes, he said. l have integrated it into my human morph.
"Time," Jake said, pointing at his watch.
Ax began to change.
I'd only seen him do it once before - soon after we rescued him from the sunken Andalite
dome ship.
I've seen a lot of morphing. I've done a lot of it, too. It's always creepy watching a human
being become some strange animal. But watching Ax morph was different. He wasn't
becoming an animal. He was becoming a human being.
The stalk eyes shrank and disappeared in his head. The deadly scorpion tail shriveled and
withered and slithered up inside him like someone sucking up a piece of spaghetti.
His front hooves disappeared completely.
"Whoa, look out," Jake said. He caught the Andalite as he fell forward, with no front legs to
support him.
Thank you. I must practice standing with only two legs.
A gash opened in his face and grew lips and teeth. A nose grew where there had just been
small vertical slits. His eyes became smaller, more human.
But the weirdest thing about Ax morphing was not just that he looked like a human. It was
that he looked like a particular human.
Actually, four particular humans. See, he had absorbed DNA from Jake and Cassie and
Rachel and me. Somehow, by some process we did not understand, he was able to combine
all four genetic patterns to come up with one person.
The end result was definitely strange and disturbing.
I looked at him and saw some of myself, and Jake, and Rachel and Cassie, too, although Ax
was male. That was the most bizarre part. Looking at him and thinking, Hey, he looks
familiar. Really familiar. In fact, hey, that's my hair!
"Ax, you could be either a really pretty guy, or a kind of unattractive girl," I said.
"I am an Andalite," he said. "Andalite. Lite. Ite."
"Okay, put on those additional clothes," Jake said. "Let's get going. Tobias?" He looked up to
the rafters.
On my way. I'll check on the bus, Tobias said, and flew away.
"More clothing? Clo. Clo-theeeeng. Clo- theeng?" Ax said.
15
"Ax? Don't do that," I said.
"What? Wha wha wha. Tuh."
"That. Where you play with the sounds. Just say what you need to say, and stop."
Like I said, the Andalites have no mouths and no spoken speech. Ax seemed to think mouths
were some kind of toy.
"Yes," Ax agreed. "Yah. Ess."
"And one other thing? The shoes go on your feet. Not in your pockets."
"Yes. I remember. Mem. Ber." He pulled his sneakers out of his pockets and looked at them
helplessly. Rachel and Cassie each took a foot and got him laced up.
"People are going to think he's weird," Rachel said, sounding exasperated.
"Fortunately, it's the mall on a Saturday morning," I pointed out. "It'll be full of weird people.
"
"Not this weird," Rachel said. "This could be trouble."
"Isn't it a little late for you to admit that I was right and this idea is insane?" I asked her. "Be
sides, no need to worry. I'll be there."
"Great. Then it's sure to be a disaster."
We caught the bus without any problem. Ax made strange mouth noises the entire trip, but
the bus was mostly empty.
We got to the mall right on time.
"So far, so good," Jake said as we headed into the mall.
I rolled my eyes. "Jake? Do me a favor. Don't ever say 'so far, so good.' The only time anyone
ever says 'so far, so good' is right before every thing blows up in his face."
"So far. So far. Farrrrr. Faaaar," Ax said, try ing out the sounds. "So. Sssso far so so so good.
"
"Oh, man," I said.
16
Chapter 4
The mall was a zoo. Wall-to-wall people. Old people moving real slow. Married people with
squalling babies in big huge strollers. High school kids trying to look cool. Mall police trying
to look tough. Good-looking girls carrying bags from The Limited.
Your basic Saturday at the mall.
"Okay, where is Radio Shack?"Jake wondered.
"I don't know," I said.
"Is it up on the second level? You know, down by Sears?"
"Is that it? Or is that Circuit City?"
"Let me check the map over there. Ax? Come on with..." Jake stopped suddenly. "Marco?
Where is Ax?"
I spun around. "He was right here!"
Bodies everywhere! All I saw were bodies. Men, women, boys, girls, babies. But no aliens.
At least not that I could see. We had lost Ax!
It had taken a total of about two minutes for us to mess up.
Then, suddenly, I saw a strangely familiar face.
"There he is! On the escalator!"
"How did he get all the way over there?" Jake demanded.
We took off after him, but it was so crowded we could barely move. Jake started pushing his
way through. I grabbed him by the arm.
"Don't run, man. The mall cops will think you're ripping something off. Besides, we can't
attract attention. Controllers shop, too."
Jake slowed instantly. "You're right. This many people, some of them are sure to be
Controllers."
We threaded our way, moving as quickly as we could without being too obvious. I just kept
saying "excuse me, excuse me," and tried not to bump into anyone who looked like he'd get
mad and pound me.
It seemed to take forever to reach the escalator. By then we had totally lost sight of Ax.
"As long as he doesn't demorph we're okay," Jake said. "I mean, what's the worst he could
do?"
"Jake, I don't want to think about the worst he could do," I said.
17
"There!"
"Where?"
"Over at Starbucks. The coffee place."
I'm not as tall as Jake so I couldn't see him as easily. But as we got near Starbucks, I spotted
him. He was standing patiently in line.
We got to him just in time to hear him say, "I'll have... I-yull, lie, have a double latte, too.
Double. Bull. Bull. Latayayay."
"He must have heard someone else say it," I whispered to Jake.
"Caff or decaf?" the clerk asked.
Ax stared. "Caff? Caff caff caff?"
"That will be two ninety-five."
Ax stared some more. "Fi-ive."
Jake reached into his pocket and yanked out the money he'd brought to pay for things at
Radio Shack. "Here you go," he said, peeling off three dollars.
I took Ax's arm and guided him to the pickup window. "Ax, don't go off on your own, okay?
We almost lost you."
"Lost? I am here. Hee-yar."
"Yeah, look, just stay close, okay?" I gave Jake a look. "See? It's your fault. You said, 'so far,
so good.'"
The Starbucks guy handed Ax a paper cup.
Ax took it. He looked around to see what other people were doing. Like them, he put a lid on
his cup.
Then, still mimicking the others, he attempted to drink.
"Um, Ax?" I said. "You have to drink where the little hole is in the lid."
"A hole! In the lid! No spills! Ills!"
This was the coolest thing Ax had ever seen. I guess coffee cup technology hasn't advanced
very far on the Andalite home world. Probably be cause they don't have mouths, and so
drinking is not a big concern. But whatever the reason, Ax wouldn't shut up about it.
"So simple! Imple. And yet so effective!"
"Yeah, it's a real miracle of human technology," I said.
18
"I have wanted to try other mouth uses. Drink ing. Eating." Then, as an afterthought, he
added, "Eeee-ting. Ting."
"Just line the little hole up with your mouth," I said. "Come on, there's Radio Shack. We've
already lost like ten minutes."
The two of us hemmed Ax in and herded him toward Radio Shack.
Then he drank the coffee.
"Ahhh! Ohhh! Oh, oh, oh, what? What? What is that?!"
"What?" I asked, alarmed. I swiveled my head back and forth, looking for some danger.
"A new sense. It... I cannot explain it. It is... it comes from this mouth." He pointed at his
mouth. "It happened when I drank this liquid. It was pleasant. Very pleasant."
It took a few seconds for Jake and I to realize what he was talking about. "Oh. Taste! He's
tasting it," Jake said. "He doesn't normally have the sense of taste."
"At least he stopped repeating sounds," I muttered.
"Taste," Ax said, contradicting me. "Aste. Tuh-aste."
He drank his coffee and we rushed him to Radio Shack. "Okay, look, Ax, we have very little
time. See if the stuff you need is here."
I'll say this for Ax. He may have been a little weird by human standards, but the boy knows
his technology. I mean, he went down the pegboards in the back of the store and just started
lifting off different components.
"This must be a primitive gairtmof," he said, inspecting a small switch. "And this could be a
sort of fleer. Very primitive, but it will work."
In ten minutes' time he'd accumulated a dozen components, ranging from coaxial cable to
batteries to things I didn't even recognize.
"Good," he said at last. "All I lack is a Z- Space transponder. Transponder. PONder."
"A what?"
"A Z-Space transponder. It translates the signal into zero space."
I looked at Jake. "Zero space?"
Jake looked back at me and shrugged. "Never heard of it."
Ax looked doubtful. "Zero space," he repeated. "Zeeeero. The opposite of true space. Antireality."
He looked patiently from one of us to the other. "Zero space, the nondimension
where faster-than-light travel is possible. Bull. Possi-bull-uh."
19
"Oh," I said sarcastically. "That zero space. Um, Ax? Sorry to be so primitive and all, but we
don't have faster-than-light travel. And I've never heard of zero space."
"Oh."
"Yeah. Oh."
"Let's get this stuff and worry about the other thing later," Jake said calmly. But I could tell
he was getting slightly hacked off. "I'll go pay for this stuff."
Ax drained the last of his coffee. "Taste," he said. "I would like more taste." He cocked his
head. "I smell things. I believe... buh-leeve... blee... bleeve... there is a connection
between smell and taste."
"Yeah, you're right," I said. "We can't travel faster than light, but we can make a sticky bun
that smells pretty good."
"Sticky," Ax said. "Must I carry this?" he asked, indicating his empty coffee cup.
"No, you can just throw it away."
Bad choice of words. Ax threw the coffee cup. He threw it hard. It hit one of the cashiers in
the head.
"Hey!"
"Sorry, it was an accident, man," I yelped, rushing to the cashier. "He's... he's sick. He, um,
has this condition. You know, like out-of-control spasms."
Jake said, "Yeah, it's not his fault. It's like a seizure!"
The clerk rubbed his head. "Okay, forget it. Besides, he's out of here and that's all I care
about."
"He's what?"
Jake and I turned fast. But Ax was gone.
Jake grabbed the bag of stuff and raced after me out into the stream of people.
Ax was nowhere to be seen.
But then I looked down at the lower level. There was a crowd of people kind of surging. All
moving in the same direction. Like they were running to see something.
"They're heading toward the food court," Jake said.
"Oh, I have a very bad feeling about this," I said.
We ran for the escalator. We shoved down it, yelling "excuse me" every two seconds.
20
We got to the food court. We wormed our way through a crowd of laughing, giggling,
pointing people.
And there, all alone - because all the sane people had pulled away - was Ax.
He was racing like some lunatic from table to table, snatching up leftover food and shoving it
in his mouth.
As I watched he grabbed a half-eaten slice of pizza.
"Taste!" he yelled as he scarfed a huge bite. He threw the rest of the pizza through the air. It
just missed the mall cop who was closing in on him.
Ax couldn't care less. He had found a piece of Cinnabun. "This was the smell!" he cried. He
jammed the roll in his mouth. "Ahhh! Ahhh! Taste! Taste! Wonderful! Ful. Ful."
"They do make a good sticky bun," I muttered to Jake.
"We have to get him out of here," Jake hissed.
"Too late. Look! Three more mall cops."
The cops jumped at Ax.
Ax decided it was a good time to throw the rest of the bun away. It hit the nearest cop in the
face.
"Ax! Run! Run!" I yelled.
I guess I got through, because Ax ran.
Unfortunately, he couldn't run very well in his two-legged human morph.
So as he ran and stumbled, chased by huffing, puffing mall police, he began to change.
21
Chapter 5
Stop!" a cop yelled. "I am ordering you to halt!"
But Ax wasn't interested in halting. He was panicked.
A woman stepped out of the Body Shop holding a bag full of colorful jars. Ax plowed into
her. The bag went flying.
The stalks began to grow out of the top of his head. The extra eyes appeared on the ends and
turned backward to watch the people chasing him.
Jake and I were two of those people. We were ahead of the cops, but not by much.
Fortunately, I guess the cops assumed we were just idiots running along for fun.
I could hear one of the cops yelling into his walkie-talkie. "Cut him off at the east entrance!"
Legs began to grow from the chest of Ax's human morph. His own front legs, small at first,
but growing rapidly.
He was slowing down as his human legs began to change. The knees were reversing
direction. His spine elongated into the beginnings of a tail.
That's when the screaming started.
"Ahhhhhhhhh!"
"What is it? What IS it?"
People were screaming and running and dropping their bags as they caught a glimpse of the
nightmare creature Ax had become. Half-human, half-Andalite. A fluid, shifting mess of halfformed
features.
I couldn't blame them. I felt like screaming myself.
We were getting near the exit, racing past the shoe repair place.
Suddenly, Ax fell forward, tangled up in his own mutating legs. He skidded down the
polished marble floor.
Most of the crowd had been left behind, but the mall police were still with us.
"You kids get out of the way!" one of them yelled at us. "This guy could be dangerous."
Ax sprang up. He was much more sure of himself, now that he was on his four Andalite
hooves. The morph was almost entirely complete. His mouth was gone. His extra eyes were
in place. His two arms and four legs were fully formed.
Then, at the very last, the tail appeared.
It was then that I heard the nearest mall cop, in an awed, frightened whisper, say, "Andalite!"
22
I quickly turned and looked at him. Only a Controller would recognize an Andalite.
The Controller cop drew his gun from his holster.
"RUN!" I yelled at Ax.
The Controller stood between Ax and the door. Big mistake. The Andalite tail flashed, faster
than my eyes could follow. The cop's gun went flying through the air. He clutched at a hand
that was red with blood.
Out the door we blew, running for our lives.
Sirens!
"Those are real cops coming," I said. "Not mall rent-a-cops!"
Where should we go? Ax demanded, reverting to thought-speak.
"Oh, now he wants advice?!" I looked around frantically. The bus was not going to be an
option. The mall cops poured from the glass doors. The city police screamed toward us in
their black- and-whites.
All we could do was run. So we ran. Up rows of parked cars. Two kids and a guy who did not
belong on this planet.
"The grocery store!" Jake yelled.
"What?" I gasped. I was getting tired.
"In there!" he pointed. It was the grocery store across the parking lot. It was the only way we
could go.
Police cars screeched to a halt all around us.
"Freeze!"
"I don't think so," I said.
We jetted through the big glass doors of the supermarket at a full, panicked run. I halfway
expected to hear guns firing and bullets whizzing.
"Jake!" I yelled. "Help me here!" I had an idea for slowing down our pursuers. I grabbed a
big row of parked grocery carts and shoved them back toward the doors. Jake grabbed on and
helped.
Then we were off and running again, with Ax skittering shakily on the slippery floor and
banging into groceries. Cans of olives and tomatoes crashed behind him.
Customers screamed and crashed their carts into each other.
"It's a monster! Mommy, it's a monster!" some little kid yelled.
23
"It's just a pretend monster," his mother said.
Yeah. A pretend monster. Right.
Then I saw our way out. It was at the end of the aisle. But I needed some time. I needed to
get everyone out of our way. We couldn't have witnesses.
"There's a bomb!" I screamed, at the top of my lungs. "BOMB!"
"What?" Jake demanded.
"There's a bomb! A bomb in the store! Run! Run! Everyone out! A BOMB!"
"What are you doing?!" Jake yelled.
"The cops have the place surrounded. There's only one way out," I snapped. I pointed.
I pointed at the live lobster tank at the end of the aisle by the seafood counter.
"Oh, no," Jake groaned.
"Oh, yes." I grinned.
The shoppers were running in panic, either from the supposed bomb or just from Ax. But the
baskets in the doorway and the people shoving to escape slowed the cops down for a precious
few moments.
I had a feeling the Controller cops were making sure that no real cops came in after us. They
wanted us for themselves. With no human witnesses.
"Let's go for a swim," I said.
It was a big lobster tank, fortunately. I hoisted myself up the side and climbed in. Jake was
right behind me. We each grabbed a lobster and threw one to Ax.
It was not easy "acquiring" the lobster. It took concentration. And all I could think was that
there were an awful lot of cops outside the store, probably getting ready to rush in. And they
would all have guns.
The lobster went limp and passive, the way animals do when you acquire them.
I dropped him back in the water. We stripped off our outer clothes and shoes and stuffed
them, along with the Radio Shack bag, in a trash can.
Ax had already begun to morph. Jake and I waited till he had shrunk a little and then hauled
him into the tank with us.
He was already hard, like armor, and his arms had begun to split open and swell.
Then I began the morph.
24
I've been afraid a lot since we became Animorphs. But I have not gotten used to it. And I can
tell you, I was so scared my bones were rattling.
At any second they were going to rush in.
At any moment they were going to catch us half-morphed.
I looked over at Jake. His eyes were gone, re placed by little black BBs.
"Ewww."
As I watched, eight spindly, blue, insectlike legs erupted from his chest.
"Aaaaahhh!" I yelped in shock.
Jake's face seemed to open up, to split open into a complex mess of valves. I think I would
have thrown up, seeing that. Except that I, also, no longer had a mouth.
At that very moment, I felt antennae explode from my forehead like impossibly long spears.
I was shrinking as I morphed, falling, falling, falling down into the water which had been
around my thighs and was now around my neck.
I had the terrifying sensation of knowing that all the bones inside my body were dissolving,
as a hard, fingernail-like crust covered me all over.
My human body was melting away.
My human vision was fading. I could no longer see the way a human sees.
Which was a good thing. Because I really did not want to see what I was becoming.
I think I might have just started screaming and never stopped. But I no longer had a mouth, or
throat, or vocal cords capable of making sounds.
I had four sets of legs. I had two huge pincers. I could see them, kind of. They were a
fractured image in my lobster eyes. I couldn't see much of the rest of me. But I could see
other lobsters in the water.
I was very frightened.
Eat.
Eat.
Kill and eat.
The lobster brain surfaced suddenly, bubbling up within my human awareness. It had two
thoughts.
25
Eat.
Eat.
Kill and eat.
I was getting input from senses I couldn't begin to understand. My extraordinarily long anten
nae felt water temperature, and water current, and vibration. But I didn't know what any of it
meant.
My eyes were almost useless at first. They showed fractured, incredible images, with none of
the colors I knew.
I could see my pincers out in front of me. I could see my antennae. And behind me I could
see a curved, brownish-blue surface, with humps and bumps on it.
My body! I realized with a sickening sensa tion. That was my back. My hard shell.
I could not look down and see my belly, or the hairy swimmerets scurrying away, back
beneath my tail. I could not see my eight spiderlike legs, but I could feel as they propelled me
suddenly, scrabbling along the glass bottom of the tank.
Jake? I called out.
Yeah. I'm here, he said. He sounded shaky. Which was fine, because I was on the verge of
crying. If lobsters could cry.
You okay?
Yeah. This is not my favorite morph, though.
No, I agreed. It was good being able to talk to him. I mean, you'd think you were losing
your mind otherwise.
Ax? Jake called.
I...I feel.... I am hungry. This animal wants to eat, Ax answered.
Yeah, well, that's pretty normal for morphs, I said. Most animals care about food and not
much else. I don't think lobsters are exactly geniuses^
It wants to find prey, Ax said wonderingly.
I know. Who'd have figured lobsters were predators? I said.
It's easier to deal with a predator brain than with prey. That prey fear can be
overwhelming, Jake said.
I saw a lobster close by. Is that you, Jake? Wiggle your left pincer.
26
The left pincer did not move. I realized this lobster had a rubber band around his pincer.
None of us had rubber bands. Rubber bands were not a part of the lobster DNA.
I saw a lobster to my left, unbanded. And another behind him. That was the three of us. There
were half a dozen rubber-banded lobsters floating or just sitting.
Speaking of fear, I said. Can anyone see out of the tank ?
Just shadows, Jake said. These are pathetic eyes.
Yes, even worse than your human eyes, Ax commented.
This is really creepy, I said. I've never had an exoskeleton before.
These pincers are most excellent, though, Ax said.
I saw him opening and closing them.
Ax? Jake said. You say you can keep track of time accurately? Start tracking.
Yes, Prince Jake, Ax said. So far, ten of your minutes have passed.
That much? I was surprised. Ten minutes? The cops must have come in by now.
l was thinking the same thing, Jake said.
We better wait as long as we can. Close to the full two hours, I said. Although I really
don't want to spend any more time than I have to in this creepy morph.
27
Chapter 6
According to Ax, an hour had passed when it happened.
I felt a strange disturbance in the water. Something large had splashed in. I sensed something
above me.
Before I could think or react, I felt pressure on my shell.
I was rising rapidly through the water, being lifted.
Jake! Something has me!
Sudden shock!
I was out of the water.
Dryness. Heat. My antennae waved wildly as I tried to understand. My eyes registered
nothing but bright light and huge, indistinct shadows.
Something large closed my right pincer forcibly. I could not open it. Then my left.
Rubber bands! I couldn't see them in this waterless environment. I was nearly blind. But I
knew what had happened.
Someone had picked me up and rubber-banded my pincers.
Then I was tumbling, sliding, rubbing against things I could tell were other lobsters.
Jake! Are you in this, too?
Yeah, but don't ask me what it means. I can't see or hear very well.
Is it them? Is it Controllers?
Something very cold dropped on me and slithered around my body.
Ice?
I felt a sensation of swinging back and forth for a while, like being on a swing.
Ax?
Yes, Marco. I am here, too. What is happening?
You got me, I said. Maybe the cops have us. Maybe the Controllers have us. I don't
know.
Let's stay in morph as long as we can, Jake said. Maybe we'll figure it out. But if the
Controllers have us, the last thing we want to do is demorph.
The ice seemed to be making me sleepy. Or not exactly sleepy, just slow. Sluggish.
28
I guess I kind of zoned out for a while. I didn't know for how long, until I became suddenly
alert and heard Ax's drowsy voice in my head saying, We have only seven minutes left.
That jolted me. I was not about to spend the rest of my life trapped as a lobster.
Okay, I am out of this morph, I don't care who sees, I yelled.
Agreed, Jake said. Time's up. We have to take our chances.
At least it's warmer now, I said. I tried to look around, but my antennae felt nothing in the
air. And my eyes only saw meaningless, blurry gray forms.
I focused on demorphing. I wondered if I could close my human eyes when Jake started to
reappear. I really did not want to watch Jake and Ax demorph. Once had been enough. I
would already have nightmares for a month.
Here goes, I said. I began the change.
But just then I again felt the sensation of pressure on my shell. My pincers came free.
Someone, or something, had removed the rubber bands.
And suddenly I felt a warmth billowing up around me.
Steam.
Oh, no.
53 MOOOOOO! I screamed silently.
I knew where I was! I was in someone's hand, about to be dropped into a
pot of boiling water.
NOOOOOOOOO!
And maybe it was because I was so desperate to scream, or maybe it was
just the luck of the morph, but my human mouth was one of the first
things to emerge.
Small, open lips appeared in place of my lob ster mouth.
I didn't have normal lungs or vocal cords yet, so I couldn't make a sound.
But I guess I didn't have to.
I guess suddenly having lips appear on a lobster was enough to make the woman drop me.
I fell. My front pincers caught the edge of the pan. Sheer dumb luck. I hung onto the edge of
the pan as my tail curled up, inches above the boiling water in the pot.
29
I grew rapidly, becoming a baby-sized creature half-covered with hard cuticle, half flesh.
Human eyes grew in place of the useless stalk eyes. The antennae sucked back into my
forehead. I heard a grinding sound as my spine reappeared inside me.
With a desperate surge of energy, I tumbled over the side of the pan and landed flat on my
shell back, atop the stove. I was looking up into a stove hood.
I rolled away from the heat and fell.
But the fall wasn't far, because I was now the size of a toddler, more human than lobster. I
was one nasty-looking kid, though, with eight legs growing from my stomach and chest.
My human hearing returned with shocking effect.
"Ahhhhhh! Ahhhhhhh! Ahhhhhh! Ahhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhh!"
Someone was screaming uncontrollably.
My legs were back! I stood up. I looked around and saw a woman. Sort of pretty, except for
the fact that her eyes were wide with terror and she was screaming.
"Ahhhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhhh!"
I glanced over and saw the plastic bag filled with ice. That's how she had carried us from the
supermarket. Now we were in her kitchen. Jake was already mostly human, standing with
one foot still in the grocery bag. The eight legs sucked into his chest. His human eyes
appeared.
Ax was a truly disgusting combination of Andalite and lobster. But as I watched, he
eliminated the last traces of crustacean.
Unfortunately, this did not make the woman feel any better.
"Ahhhhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhhh!"
"It's okay, ma'am," I said. "We're not going to hurt you."
"Calm down, ma'am," Jake said. "Please calm down."
Her eyes darted wildly from me to Jake to Ax. She kept screaming.
"Ahhhhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhhhh! Ahhhhhhh!"
"Look, it's okay," I said. "We're going to leave. No one is going to hurt you."
"You... you... you... you... lobsters!" she managed to say.
"Yeah, it is slightly weird, I'll admit," I said. "But it's okay. It's just a dream."
"A... a... a dream?"
30
"Yes, ma'am. Just a dream," Jake said reassuringly.
I looked at Ax. "Can you morph to human yet? We need to get out of here."
"I can morph again," he assured me. And he started right away.
"We're going to leave now," Jake said. "You can wake up later, okay? But I wouldn't tell any
one about this dream."
The woman shook her head violently.
"See, it could get you in trouble with... with certain people. Besides, folks would just think
you're crazy."
She nodded with extreme conviction.
Ax was almost human. We were all dressed in our slightly ridiculous morphing outfits, but
they would have to do.
We headed for the door. Then I caught sight of three more lobsters, still in the bag of ice. I
guess it was supposed to be a dinner for six.
"Ma'am?" I asked. "Do us a favor, would you, please? Take those other guys down to the
beach and let them go. Okay?"
31
Chapter 7
Jake and I were playing video games at the mall. I was kicking his butt. He was distracted
because he was eating.
He was eating a big red bug with huge pincers.
I told him not to eat it. It would upset his stomach. But he just ignored me.
Then, suddenly, his stomach exploded. It just exploded outward, guts flying everywhere.
Eight huge spider legs appeared, like something in him was trying to crawl out.
I tried to get away, but the steam was rising. I was burning up!
I tried to run, but my legs were gone, replaced by a tail that jerked and kicked.
I screamed.
And screamed.
"Marco, Marco, wake up!"
My eyes opened very suddenly. Darkness. Someone holding onto me. I was confused.
"Mom?" I asked.
Silence. Then, "No."
My brain snapped back into reality. I was in my room. In my own bed. My dad was sitting on
the side of the bed. He looked concerned and sad.
"It's just me," he said. He let go of my shoulders.
I felt sweaty all over. Cold sweat.
"I guess you had a nightmare," my father said.
"Yeah," I said shakily. "Sorry I woke you up."
"I wasn't asleep," he said.
I glanced at my clock. The red numbers showed 3:18 a.m. I didn't have to ask why my dad
was awake. He often sat awake late into the night. Sometimes watching TV. Sometimes just
staring into space.
He'd been that way since my mom died.
My dad looks very different from me. For one thing, he's pretty tall. He's paler than me, too,
and has light brown eyes. My mom was Hispanic, very dark hair and eyes. Everyone says I
look like her. I know it's true, because sometimes when he's thinking about her, my dad will
just glaze over and stare at me like I'm not even there. Like I'm a picture of someone else.
32
"I'm okay now," I said. "You should try to get some sleep."
He nodded. "Yeah. I'll do that. Look, Marco, you weren't dreaming about her, were you?"
"No, Dad. Why?"
"Because the first thing you said when you woke up was 'Mom.'"
"I guess I was confused."
"Do you ever? Dream about her, I mean?"
"Sometimes," I admitted. "But they aren't nightmares."
He almost smiled. "No. I guess they wouldn't be, would they?" He picked up the little framed
picture of my mom that I keep on my nightstand. Then he got that twisted look of sick grief I
had seen on his face every day for the last two years.
Part of me is mad when I see him that way. Part of me just wants to say, "Dad, get it together.
Let her go. She's dead. She doesn't want us spending the rest of our lives mourning."
But I never do say that.
After a few minutes, he got up. He made some last remark about how I shouldn't be worried
about bogeymen, and left. I knew he would sit out in the living room alone, and eventually
fall asleep in his chair.
I lay there in the dark and tried to get the dream out of my head. But it's hard to forget a
nightmare that's true.
There. It is finished. Ax held up a small mess of electronic components for all of us to see.
It looked sort of like an exploded remote control, but smaller.
It was the next day. We were out in the woods, grouped together beneath a huge old oak tree.
It was like a strange sort of picnic. Jake and Cassie had each brought hand tools for Ax to use
- screwdrivers, a solder gun, a battery-powered drill, a hammer, wrenches, pliers and, of
course we had the electronic parts we had stashed in the trash before the lobster incident.
Rachel had brought sandwiches. I'd brought a six-pack of Pepsi.
It was a nice day, sunny and warm. I needed a nice day. I needed sunlight. I'd had a bad
night, with too little sleep.
"So, Ax," I said. "What is it?"
It is a distress beacon that can broadcast on Yeerk frequencies, he said with satisfaction. l
know this is a Yeerk frequency. We have used it to trick them before. To send false
instructions.
"All it needs is a Z-Space transponder," Jake said wearily, rolling his eyes at me.
33
I think Jake may have been a bit ragged out by the lobster incident, too. He seemed snappish
and kind of unfocused. Not at all Jake-like.
"And since we can't get a Z-Space transponder, it's basically useless, right?" Rachel asked.
Yes. Totally useless without the transponder.
Rachel threw up her hands. "Then what exactly are we doing?"
Jake just shrugged. Cassie sidled up next to him and gave him a small little sideways hug. No
one was supposed to notice. But right away Jake's harsh look mellowed a little.
That wasn't doing anything for my bad mood, though. "Well, I'm guessing that in about two
centuries or so, humans will discover zero space and make transponders. Whatever they are.
But in the meantime, I'm going to have a sandwich."
Tobias came drifting down through the branches and leaves of the tree, almost silent. He
landed on a low branch of the oak. No one anywhere near here, he reported. Looks safe.
At least as far as you guys are concerned. But there's a golden eagle about a quarter-mile
south. I think I'll stay out of sight for a while and hope he goes away.
Not for the first time, I realized how tough Tobias's life is. He shares all the same dangers we
do, but he also has all the dangers that come from being a red-tail hawk. Golden eagles
sometimes prey on hawks. They are bigger and faster than he is.
So. What's up? Tobias asked.
"We have a completely useless distress beacon," Rachel said. "We need a transponder that
probably won't be invented on this planet for a century or two."
How about Chapman? Tobias said.
"What about Chapman?" I asked. Chapman is the assistant principal at our school. He's also
one of the most important Controllers.
I used to hate Chapman. I mean, once I knew that he was a Controller and all. But then we
learned that he surrendered his freedom to the Yeerks as part of a deal to keep his daughter,
Melissa, safe.
It's hard to hate someone for protecting their kid. Even if he or she ended up being a deadly
enemy. That's one of the terrible things about fighting the Yeerks. The real enemy is just the
evil slug in a person's brain. The host is often to tally innocent.
We know that Chapman communicates with Visser Three, Tobias said. He talks to Visser
Three on the Yeerk mother ship, or on the Blade ship. Wherever Visser Three is. Doesn't that
mean that Chapman's secret radio thing must have one of these Z-Space transponders?
Yes! Ax said instantly. If this Controller speaks to any Yeerk ship, he would have to
have a Z-Space transponder. The Yeerk ships are all cloaked. Cloaking technology requires a
Z-Space deflection.
34
Jake caught my eye. "That's pretty much what I figured."
I smiled, despite the fact that I had a bad feeling about the way this conversation was go ing.
"How big is a Z-Space thingie?" Cassie asked.
Ax held two of his fingers close together, indicating something the size of a pea. There
would be several redundant units in any transmitter. We could take one without it being
noticed. At least not right away.
Rachel stood. "We are not going into Chapman's house again," she said firmly. "The last time
we did, we almost got Melissa made into a Controller. We cannot morph her cat again.
Chapman is on guard now. It won't be easy this time." She realized what she'd said and
added, "Not that it was exactly easy the first time."
"A historic first," I observed. "Rachel saying 'no' to a mission."
"Rachel's right," Jake said. "We do nothing that will endanger Melissa again. So the cat is
out. Also any other plan that means major risk that Chapman will discover us."
For a while no one said anything.
Finally Ax spoke silently in our heads. I can not ask anyone to take risks for me. You
rescued me from the bottom of the ocean. You sheltered me. And my foolishness almost got
Prince Jake and Marco killed yesterday.
What he said surprised me a little. I guess I'd expected him to argue that we should try and
help him.
"What if..." Cassie began.
We all looked at her. "Yes?" Jake asked.
"What if there was a way to get into Chapman's basement room - the secret room where he
keeps the transmitter - without even going through the house? With almost no chance of
getting caught?"
I felt my heart sink. "As long as it doesn't involve anything with an exoskeleton."
I'd meant it as a joke. But Cassie just looked at me solemnly.
"What?" I demanded. "A lobster again? How is a lobster - "
"No," she said. "Think smaller. Much smaller. Much, much smaller."
35
Chapter 8
" Ants. That was Cassie's brilliant idea. Ants.
See, ants could get into Chapman's basement. And ants could carry away the small
transponder.
Ants.
This was what my life had come to. We ended up spending a couple of hours debating
whether we should be red ants or black ants. I finally left in disgust. I didn't want to be an ant,
red, black, or any other color.
I saw Jake the next day in school. I had just come out of history class, where I had blown a
pop quiz.
I wasn't in the best mood.
I was opening my locker and muttering about the Mexican-American War, and how was
anyone supposed to remember the difference between that war and the Texas war of
independence.
"Hi," Jake said. "The answer is black. Turns out most of the ants near Chapman's house are
black. Tobias checked it out."
I looked over Jake's shoulder to make sure no one was close enough to overhear. "Jake, I
don't want to be a bug. I've been a gorilla, an osprey, a dolphin, a seagull, a trout, of all
things, a lob ster... and I'm probably forgetting a few. Gorilla was fun. Dolphin was fun.
Osprey was fun. Ant? Not fun. Basically, bugs are a bad idea."
Jake shrugged. "I was a flea. That was no big thing." He grinned like he'd made the world's
funniest joke. "Seriously, it was like nothing. I couldn't see anything. I could barely hear
anything, just vibrations. All I knew was I liked warm bodies and whenever I got hungry I
just poked a hole in some warm skin."
"And sucked blood."
He looked a little uncomfortable. "Well, it was Rachel's blood. Kind of. I mean, okay, it was
cat blood, but Rachel was morphing the cat."
"Jake? Do you ever listen to yourself?"
"I try not to think about it," he admitted. "But look, we want to try and give Ax a chance to
get home. And if he stays here he's a danger to us. We've got this big Anda - " He looked
around to make sure no one could hear, and lowered his voice. "We have this big Andalite
running around Cassie's farm. What if someone sees him? Any Controller is going to know
what he is. And they're going to wonder why he's on Cassie's land."
I nodded. "Yeah. You're right. But I almost died the other day. I was almost boiled alive. I
know you're the big hero type, Jake, but I'm not."
36
I grabbed my book out of the locker, slammed the door, and headed down the hall. Jake kept
pace.
"You know what next Sunday is?" I asked him suddenly. I hadn't planned to say anything.
"Sunday? I don't know. What?"
"Two years, to the day. Two years since my mom died. And I don't know what to do. I don't
know whether I should talk to my dad about it, or just let it pass. But I know one thing - this
would be a really bad week for me to turn up dead."
I kept walking. He didn't follow me.
Two years.
She'd taken the boat out of the marina. She'd sailed it out into a rough sea. No one knew why.
She'd never done it before. We'd always gone out together, the three of us.
That night, after the high winds had blown past, they found the boat driven up onto the rocks.
The hull was shattered. There was no sign of my mother, except for a frayed safety rope.
They never found her body. The Coast Guard guys said that was not unusual. The ocean is a
big place.
So is space, a voice in my head said.
Somewhere, very, very far away, a mother and father wondered what had become of their
children.
For a long time, I made up stories about how my mom had survived. Maybe on a desert
island or something. But I'm a realistic person, I guess. After a while I accepted it.
And after a while, Ax's parents would accept that he and his brother, Prince Elfangor, would
not be returning. That they had been lost forever in space.
Lost fighting to protect Earth. To help the human race.
To help me.
I spotted Cassie up ahead, walking with some of her friends. She smiled vaguely when she
saw me. We were supposed to kind of ignore each other in school, so no one ever figured out
that Jake and me and Cassie and Rachel were hanging out a lot.
As I brushed past her I muttered, "Tell Jake I'll do it."
Sometimes I really hate having a conscience.
37
Chapter 9
I wonder why these people moved?" Cassie said.
"Maybe they didn't like living next door to a Controller who is part of a conspiracy to take
over the world," I said. "Or else maybe they just don't like assistant principals. I could
understand that."
We were standing in the backyard of the house next to Chapman's. It was empty. There was a
"For Sale" sign in the front yard. It did make you kind of wonder why these people had
decided to move. Not that Chapman ever acted strange. That's the big problem with
Controllers - you can never tell who is or who isn't.
"It's convenient for us, anyway," Jake said.
It was night. The moon was high and full and bright, so we were hiding beneath a tree. There
was a high wooden fence between us and Chap man's.
Ax was just changing from his human morph back into his Andalite body.
We had already acquired some ants earlier, at Cassie's barn. We were getting ready to do it. I
was scared. Badly scared.
I guess the others were, too. Everyone was talking too much, the way you do when you're
nervous. Cassie was shivering like she was cold, only it was about seventy degrees out.
"Tobias?" I asked. He was in the tree, just a few inches over my head on a low branch. "How
well can you see?"
I think I'll be able to see you as long as you stay aboveground, he said. The moonlight
helps. But I'm not nearly as good at night as I am during the day. My eyes aren't much better
than yours in the dark.
"Swell," I said.
Jake glanced at his watch. "It's time. We know Chapman will be at the meeting of The
Sharing, starting about now."
The Sharing is a "front" organization for Controllers. It's a way for Controllers to get together
without anyone being suspicious. Supposedly, it's just a sort of combined Boy Scouts and
Girl Scouts. In reality it's a way for the Controllers to recruit willing hosts.
Yes, believe it or not, some people choose to accept Yeerk control.
We didn't have to ask how Jake knew about the meeting of The Sharing. Jake's brother, Tom,
is one of them. A Controller who is very into The Sharing.
"You ready, Ax?" Jake asked. The Andalite had to be back in Andalite form before he could
morph. Just like all of us had to be human before morphing into another being. Once Cassie
had tried morphing straight from one animal to another. Nothing had happened. And Cassie
is the best morpher.
38
I am ready, Ax said.
"Everyone ready?" Jake asked.
"Yep," Rachel said.
Even she sounded tense. There was a bad feeling hanging over this whole thing. Or maybe I
was just being paranoid.
"Okay," Jake said. "Soon as we're all morphed, we head across the grass, down along the
wall, underground. We find a crack or a hole, and enter the basement."
"Yeah. Nothing to it," I said.
I concentrated on the ant I had acquired ear lier. There wasn't much to think about, really.
When I'd held the ant in my hand it had just been this tiny little dot. You could see that it had
a sectioned body and legs, but that was about it.
The morphing began very quickly.
"Whoa!"
Falling! Falling!
That was the first sensation. I was shrinking rapidly. The ground was rushing up at me. It was
like one of those nightmares where you are falling and falling but never seem to hit the
ground.
I was still maybe a foot tall when my skin seemed to turn crisp, as if it had been burned. It
became hard. Harder than fingernails and glossy black.
I looked over at Cassie and nearly screamed.
She was farther along than me. Only a foot tall and hard-shelled black all over. Glistening,
ridged, plastic-looking skin.
Her legs were shriveling rapidly. So were her arms, although they had become longer, to
match her legs.
The third set of legs was growing out of her chest.
And her face...
Her face was no longer human. Her head was sort of teardrop-shaped. Wickedly-curved
mandibles were growing out of her mouth - huge, slashing, deadly-looking serrated jaws.
Her eyes had gone flat and dead. Just black dots. Antennae, looking almost like another set of
legs, sprouted from her forehead.
Her waist was pinched tight. Her lower body swelled till it looked as big as a watermelon.
39
I didn't want to watch. Because I knew that all these same changes were happening to me. I
knew it. I didn't want to think about it. I just wanted it to be over. I wanted the changes to be
done.
Suddenly, all around me, huge, raspy spears shot up out of the ground!
Grass! I was diminishing to true insect size. The rough, sharp shafts that were rising all
around me were just blades of grass. They weren't growing. I was shrinking.
One exploded directly under me. I tumbled, end over end.
And then my eyesight failed. My eyes simply stopped functioning.
I was blind!
Blind, and falling, rolling, cartwheeling down the side of a blade of grass.
I was standing upright. I knew that. I had stopped falling.
But I was blind.
No, not completely blind. It was not just blackness. But my eyes saw no detail. I could see
patches of light and areas of darkness. But they were misty and fragmented, and my ant brain
was not interested in them.
No. The world was not about sight anymore.
It was all... something else. I knew I was getting something. Something... a sense. A feeling,
almost.
Then, I could feel... I could feel my antennae waving. Waving back and forth, searching.
Searching... no. They were smelling.
My antennae were smelling. I was looking for a scent. Several scents. It was not like human
smell. Not like Jake had described dog scent when he'd morphed his dog Homer.
That kind of scent is full of possibilities. Subtleties.
This was different. I was looking for just a few scents. Just a few smells.
I tried to prepare myself. I had been through this before. There is usually a time, a brief few
seconds, before the animal mind appears with all its fear and hunger and intensity. I needed
to be prepared. Ants were tiny and weak. Surely their fear would be extreme. I would have to
be -
Then, wham!
The ant's mind erupted inside my own!
There was no fear. None.
40
There was no hunger.
There was no... no self. No me.
No me.
No...
My antennae swept the air. Strange. Not home. Not the colony.
Enemy territory.
Smell them. Smell their droppings. Smell the acrid odors they smeared along the ground to
mark their boundaries.
How are you guys doing? It's Tobias. How are you guys doing?
Strangers. The smell of others. They would come. There would be killing.
Killing. Soon.
Move.
Jake. Marco. Rachel. Cassie. Answer me. It's Tobias. Talk to me.
I began moving. My six legs picked their way nimbly. I was a nearly blind insect, picking his
way through a forest of giant saw-edged grass blades.
Food. The smell of food. Find it. Take it. Return to the colony with it.
Change direction instantly. Move toward the smell of dead beetle. Others around. Us. Ours.
They had the right smell. They were not enemy.
You guys are heading the wrong way.
Moving faster now. Feet feeling each blade of grass. Antennae sweeping the air, searching
for the scent of the enemy. Searching for the scent of the dead carcass that we had to find and
return to the colony.
Listen to me! You are going the wrong way! The ant minds are controlling you!
Close now. The scent of food was stronger.
Mandibles working. We would touch the carcass. We would judge its size. If it was too big to
carry, we would hack it into smaller pieces and carry the chunks to the colony.
You have to take control! You have to fight! You have to get a grip!
Or enemies would come. And kill.
41
The smell of enemies was everywhere.
There. We had reached the dead beetle. I scented the air. I touched it with my legs, touch ing
again and again to learn the size.
I? My legs?
Confusion.
Fight! Fight it! You have to get control!
It was big.
The others were with me. I opened my cutting mandibles wide and bit into the beetle, slicing
tough shell, biting into meat.
- listen to me. You are losing. You have to fight!
Fight?
Suddenly, I realized that there had been some thing... a sound. Yes, not a smell. Not a smell.
Not a feel.
You are humans! You are humans. Listen to me. You are not ants. Fight it! Fight it!
Yes, not a smell or a feel. In my head.
My.
Me.
Marco.
AHHH! I screamed inside my own head. Tobias said later that it scared him half to death.
He thought I was being killed.
That wasn't it at all. I had been reborn.
AHHHH! AHHHH! AHHHHH!
What's the matter? Tobias cried.
I... I... I lost myself, I said. I was gone. I was lost. I didn't even exist.
Get out of that morph! Tobias said.
But I could hear the others now, snapping back into reality. Becoming again. Crying.
What kind of creatures are these? It was Ax. He sounded terrified. Terrified. They have
no self! I was lost! There was nothing to hold onto. They are not whole. They are only parts,
like cells. Just pieces. What kind of foul creatures are these?
42
Listen. You guys morph back, Tobias said. This sucks. This isn't right.
Hive, Cassie said, sounding shattered. They are social insects. Part of a colony. A hive. I
should have guessed. I should have known. Ax is right. Each of us is only a part. Like a
single cell within a human body.
Guys? I see other ants. They're coming your way, Tobias said.
How far away? Jake asked. Can you see them up there?
 I'm not in the tree. I'm right here. I'm standing right over you. You're only a few inches
from my right talon.
I don't want to have to do this all over, Rachel said. Let's do this. Let's get it done.
Are we all in control now? Jake asked.
One by one, we said yes. It was only partly true. Yes, I had gained control over the ant mind.
But it was still there. It was powerful in a totally new way. It was the simplicity that made it
hard. The ant was a piece of a computer. Just a tiny switch, a part of a much bigger creature -
the colony.
Guys? Cassie's "voice" in my head. lf you try, you can kind of use these ant eyes - a
little, anyway. If you concentrate you can notice light and dark. It's like watching a really,
really bad black-and-white TV that's almost all snow. And you can only see what's right in
front of
you. But you can almost see a picture.
She was right. I could kind of see. But nothing I saw made any sense, anyway. I could
recognize blades of grass. But a long, sloped wall that seemed about six feet high was a
mystery to me.
Someone just ran over my talon, Tobias said.
The wall. Tobias's talon.
That's good. You're heading in the right direction^ Tobias said. You're coming up on the
fence.
If there was a fence, you couldn't prove it by me. I saw nothing. The bottom of the fence was
seven or eight body lengths above me. Irrelevant.
I don't want to go into Chapman's yard, To bias said. It would look fishy if anyone saw.
Just keep going in the same direction.
We did. I barreled through a forest of grass. Then, very suddenly, it ended. We were out of
the grass and racing across a moonscape of boulders, each the size of my head.
In my ant brain the alarm bells were still ring ing. Enemies! Enemies! Their scent was every
where.
43
But it was not fear I felt from the ant brain. It was not capable of emotion, or anything like
emotion. It simply knew that there were enemies close by.
And it knew that it would come down, sooner or later, to kill, or be killed.
44
Chapter 10
We hit the wall. I knew it was the concrete wall of the foundation. I knew, logically, that just
a foot or so over my head, the wall became wood siding. But I could not see that kind of
distance.
What I saw and felt and "smelled" was that the horizontal world had simply stopped. Reality
had a corner. The entire world, as far as I was concerned, was a corner between concrete and
sand, one vertical, one horizontal. The concrete was full of cracks and pits big enough for me
to climb inside of.
Head down, Jake reminded us. Look for a way to follow the wall down.
There's a tunnel here, Rachel said. But it... smells... bad. Real bad.
She was right. I found the tunnel, too. It was one of theirs. It belonged to the enemy.
I know there is an enemy. I can sense it, Ax said. But who? What?
I don't know, Jake said grimly. Let's just hope they're not around.
We headed down the tunnel. The smell of the enemy was powerful. Their stench wrapped
around us. We were an invading force. We were going deep, deep into enemy territory.
The tunnel was narrow. Boulders brushed constantly against my abdomen. My legs kicked
some away. Others had to be moved aside. I should have felt cramped and claustrophobic,
with the earth all around me, and my friends close ahead and behind me. But my ant mind
was at home in tunnels.
I was traveling down. I knew my head was pointed down, but gravity seemed less important
than it did when I was human.
There's a side tunnel up here, Rachel said. She was in the lead. Big surprise. There are a
couple of side tunnels. It's starting to branch out. Should I YAHHHH!
What? What?
Oh, oh, oh. An ant!
What? Rachel!
He's running! He's running away. It's okay. It's okay. He was smaller than me. He ran off
down a side tunnel.
I guess we're the baddest ants in the tunnel, I said, trying to joke away the sudden clutch of
very human terror.
Let's hope so, Jake said.
I feel air, Ax reported. A breeze. Down this next side tunnel.
Follow it, Jake said.
45
Quickly we were out of the sand boulders and in a canyon. That's what it seemed like,
anyway. Like a deep, deep canyon. A crack in the concrete foundation.
We clambered over craggy rocks and squeezed along the narrow crack. All the while the
breeze grew stronger.
Then we were out of the canyon. We were on a flat, vertical plane.
I think we're there, Cassie suggested. I sense open space all around. Air. And it's dark.
Okay. Morph out. But be careful.
Wait! Get horizontal first, I said. Humans can't cling to walls, and we don't know how
high up we are.
Marco's right. And someone should go first.
 For once , I volunteer, I said. I couldn't wait to get out of that ant body.
First I moved away from them. It was totally dark, so I didn't have to watch the changes in
myself. But trust me, feeling them was bad enough.
Once I was human again, I began to look for a light. Then I froze.
My huge, human feet could crush my friends!
I stood perfectly still and ran my hands along the wall. Nothing. Nothing. A bulletin board. A
desk! Phone. Some kind of machine, probably a fax. There! A lamp!
The sudden light was blinding. I blinked and covered my eyes with my hand. As soon as I
could see, I looked around. I was in a very small room, like a windowless office. I was alone.
Then I looked down at my body. Arms. Legs. Feet. Yes! Human! Completely human.
We see light, Jake said. I know you can't thought-speak now, so, if it's safe, flick the
light.
I could see them now. Four tiny ants, huddled against the corner of the wall. It took my
breath away.
Had that been me? I had been one of them? Down there?
I flicked the light. Seconds later, they began to demorph. I turned away, and focused on
rifling the desk.
"That was gross beyond belief," Cassie said. She was the first to complete her change.
"Yeah," I agreed.
46
"I don't want to do that again," she said. I could hear the shiver of fear and disgust in her
voice.
I didn't answer. I was too scared to want to talk about it. If I talked about it, it would become
real, you know? Better not to think. Better to shove it out of my mind.
"This is the place," Rachel said when she had grown eyes and a mouth again. "I recognize it.
Chapman's office. I was a cat when I was in here, but this is it."
"Let's get this done. In and out," Jake said nervously. "Ax? Find that transponder."
Ax, now fully Andalite again, immediately began removing a panel from the thing I thought
was a fax machine.
I continued looking through Chapman's desk. Nothing much there. No papers. No files.
Ax looked at me and smiled in that way Andalites have of smiling with just their eyes. He
touched a small cube I thought was a paperweight. The paperweight lit up and projected a
picture into the air in front of me.
"Cool," I said. "A computer, right?"
Yes. A computer.
I poked the air, pointing at a symbol that looked like it would be a folder. It opened. The
document was written in some totally alien alphabet.
You can use a computer?
"Sure. Why not? This is a few hundred years more advanced than ours but - "
Stop! Ax said suddenly. Go back to that last document.
"You can read this stuff?"
Yes. He stared intently. lt is an announcement. The Yeerks have an important visitor
arriving soon. Visser One.
"Visser One? That would be like Visser Three's boss?"
Yes. Visser One is more powerful than Visser Three. Just as Visser Three is more powerful
than Visser Four. There are forty-seven Vissers in the Yeerk empire. Or so we believe.
"Great," I said. "Forty-seven. Not all like our friend Visser Three, I hope."
Ax was back at work getting the transponder out of the faxlike machine. No, he answered.
Only Visser Three has an Andalite body. Only he can morph. Visser One has a human
body, I believe. Ah. Here, I have it.
He held up a tiny, shiny disk. No bigger than a pea.
47
"Okay, let's get out of here," Jake said. "Put that thing near the crack. We won't have to carry
it as far. Everyone, morph back. Let's bail."
It was the moment I dreaded. I didn't want to return to that ant body. It made me want to cry,
just thinking of it. But there was no other way. If we tried to sneak out of the basement by
going up through the house, we might be caught.
"Boy, I don't want to do this," I muttered. But at the same time, I focused on that ant shape.
And as I watched, my friends began to change.
Once we had shrunk back to ant size, the transponder seemed enormous. It was far bigger
than we were. Standing beside it, feeling it with my legs and antennae, it felt about as big as a
two-car garage.
Everybody says ants are incredibly strong for their size, Cassie pointed out. Let's see if
that's true.
It seemed impossible, but Cassie, Rachel and Ax managed to lift that monstrous load off the
ground.
I mean, it was like seeing three people walking down the street carrying a city bus. That's
how big it was. But it's true what they say about ants. For their size, they are some strong
little bugs.
When we reached the vertical wall, the three of them had to push it ahead and roll it up the
wall, like some gigantic steel donut.
We reached the crack. They shoved the transponder in. Jake and I were in the lead.
It took all five of us to drag that thing over the crags of the concrete canyon. But we made it
through and back to the dirt tunnel. The transponder was so big it blocked the tunnel. It was
like a spitwad in a straw. But with Ax, Rachel and Cassie behind pushing, and Jake and I
clearing boulders - grains of sand - out of the way, we made progress.
It happened suddenly.
There was no warning.
One second the tunnel ahead of me was empty. The next second it was full.
Full of a charging, racing army of ants.
Enemies, my ant brain said.
Now the killing would begin.
48
Chapter 11
They're behind us! It was Rachel, yelling.
Breaking through the side of the tunnel! Cassie screamed.
They're everywhere!
Help! Help!
Arrrrgggghhhh!
The speed of the attack was incredible. The force of the attack was impossible to explain.
There were hundreds of them. Ahead. Behind. Flooding up from side tunnels. Bursting from
the walls.
My leg! They bit off my leg!
Oh, oh, oh! My neck. Oh, help me!
There were three of them on me. They were pulling me, trying to force me down so they
could tear me apart.
Tear me apart!
A fourth scampered over my head, brushing my antennae. He locked his mandibles on my
narrow waist. He was trying to bite me in half.
There was no defense. We could not win. We would all be dead in a few seconds.
They were machines. Absolutely without fear. Unstoppable.
Morph! I yelled. lt's the only way! Morph!
One of my legs came loose, torn away. Ripped out by the roots.
Aaarrrgghhh!
No! No! Help me!
I could feel my waist being sawed through by grinding sharp mandibles.
A searing liquid was fired at me. Poison. They were stinging me. Stinging me again and
again, and ripping me apart.
Human. I wanted to be human again. Please, just let me live long enough to become human
again!
Morph! Jake's voice. Then, Aaaaahhhhh! No! NO!
My waist would snap. The mandibles would not release me.
49
Then, suddenly, the pressure around my waist was gone. Instead, I felt the sandy soil pressing
against me.
I was growing!
I couldn't breathe. Sand blocked the air. Pressure. Then, the ground around me opened up. I
swear it was like climbing up out of a grave. The air! Fresh, clean night air!
I exploded up out of the sand.
Jake was on top of me, pushing against me as he grew. And the others, who had been only
inches away in the tunnel, also pressed together in a rapidly growing heap of misshapen
bodies. I tried to squirm away, but it was awkward. I was only half human.
But at last I lay there on the ground, staring up through human eyes at the stars.
Are you guys okay? It was Tobias.
"Cassie?" Jake asked.
"I'm okay," Cassie said.
"Me, too, Jake, thanks for asking," Rachel said.
We were all alive. All in one piece. Four humans and an Andalite.
I looked down and saw the disturbed sand, where we had pushed our way up and out. Thou
sands of ants, almost too small to see, were racing wildly around.
There, too, in the dirt, was the transponder. I picked it up.
Rachel was stomping the ground back down, trying to flatten it out so it wouldn't look
strange.
"Jake?" I said. "Let's not do this again any time soon."
He nodded shakily.
"One day I'm a lobster. Then I'm an ant. I fig ure the next step down the evolutionary ladder
is a virus or something. And I just want to say right now, I'm not doing it. I am not going to
become phlegm, even to save the world."
It wasn't much of a joke, but there was a kind of lame little laugh from everyone. And Rachel
stopped stomping the ants - I mean, the ground.
That night, when I went home, I took a shower. I found the head of an ant. It was still locked
onto the skin of my waist.
Lots of people think only humans fight wars. That only humans are murderous. Let me tell
you something - compared to ants, human beings are full of nothing but peace, love, and
under standing.
50
A month or so after the experience with the ants, I picked up a book about ants. The author
said, "If ants had nuclear weapons they would probably end the world in a week."
He's wrong. It wouldn't take them that long.
51
Chapter 12
I was cool. I was fine. I slept okay. There were dreams, but I just put them out of my mind.
When I got up the next morning, I ignored the fact that my dad's eyes were red, like he'd been
crying. He was getting worse, not better, as we got closer to Sunday. To the second year
anniversary of my mom's death.
But I had to put that out of my mind, too. I had to put a lot of things out of my mind. It was
getting to be a habit.
I saw Jake in the hallway at school. I pretended not to notice him.
I saw Rachel, too. She had a dark look in her eyes. Like she hadn't slept. Like something was
really wrong.
Even Cassie seemed grim. It had gotten to all of us. It's not so easy to just forget terror. It's
not easy to just ignore the memory of your leg being ripped off.
Of being dismembered. Torn apart.
One of these days, I thought, one of us is going to go crazy. Totally, lock-me-up-in-a-rubberroom
nutso. It was too much. This wasn't how life was supposed to be.
One of us would snap. One of us would lose it. It could happen, even to strong people.
I knew. It had happened to my father. I used to think nothing could ever destroy him. But my
mom's death had.
He used to be an engineer. A scientist, really. He's incredibly smart. We had a nice house. We
had a nice car. I used to live practically next door to Jake.
I know all that stuff isn't important. I know having things isn't what life is about. But it was
still hard when my dad just stopped going to work. Jerry, his boss, tried to be nice. He gave
him a couple of weeks to deal with losing Mom.
But a couple of weeks was not enough.
My dad's a janitor now. Part-time. He gets jobs with a temporary service. He unpacks boxes
at department stores. That kind of thing. But I don't care what kind of job he has. That doesn't
matter.
What matters is that when I lost my mom, I lost my dad, too.
See, people can snap. People can lose it. I know.
I cruised through the morning classes. No big deal.
At lunch I ended up at a table with Rachel. She didn't seem to notice me. She was just
hunched over her meal, eating mechanically.
52
A girl named Jessica came walking past with her tray. She bumped into Rachel, which made
Rachel drop her fork. It splattered down in the food on her tray.
I don't know if Jessica did it deliberately or not. She's the kind of girl who thinks she's tough.
"Watch it!" Rachel snapped.
"What?" Jessica demanded, acting outraged. "Are you yelling at me? Don't give me any of
your mouth, I might have to slap it for you." Then she shoved against Rachel's back.
In a flash Rachel was up, out of her seat. She spun around. She grabbed Jessica by the collar
of her sweatshirt and pushed the girl back against the next table.
Jessica probably outweighs Rachel by fifty pounds. But it didn't matter. Rachel had her on
her back, on the table, scattering dishes and food everywhere. Rachel leaned over Jessica and
in a voice of cold steel, said, "Don't. Touch. Me."
I saw Jake across the room. Too far away to intervene. Cassie was with him. It was up to me.
I jumped up and raced to Rachel. I took a deep breath and shoved both my arms between
them.
"Back off, Marco," Rachel said.
"Get her off me! She's crazy!" Jessica cried.
I pushed against Rachel, trying to force her off Jessica. Suddenly, Jessica started lashing out.
I assume she was trying to hit Rachel.
She missed.
"Ow!" I grabbed my left eye. "What are you hitting me for?"
And that's when the first teacher showed up.
Five minutes later, Jessica, Rachel and I were sitting in the assistant principal's office.
Chapman's office.
Jessica was acting outraged in a very loud voice. Rachel was staring stonily ahead. I was
wondering whether my eye would just keep swelling up.
Chapman glared at us. "What is the meaning of this?" he demanded. "Fighting in the lunch
room? And you, Rachel, of all people!"
"What, like you think she's better than me?" Jessica demanded.
Chapman ignored her. He focused on Rachel. "Is something the matter? Mr. Halloram says
you started the fight. Are you okay, Rachel? Is there some kind of stress in your life?"
53
For a split second, I was afraid. The look in Rachel's eyes was dangerous. I had this terrible
flash of her saying, "Yeah, Mr. Chapman, I am a little stressed. I nearly got killed turning
into an ant to sneak into your basement to fight you and the rest of your evil Yeerk friends."
I knew Rachel was too cool for anything like that. But then, I would have said she was too
cool to start a fight in the lunchroom.
"It's my fault, Mr. Chapman," I said.
"Your fault?" His eyes narrowed.
"Yes, sir. Urn, they were fighting over me. See, they both want me. They're both madly in
love with me, and I can certainly understand why. Can't you?"
"Are you crazy, you little toad?!" Jessica shrieked.
But when I glanced over at Rachel I saw just the slightest little tugging at the corner of her
mouth. The beginnings of a smile.
Chapman yelled at us for a few minutes and told us all to make appointments with the school
counselor. Then he let us go.
In the hallway outside his office, Rachel walked with me.
"I wish I could do that," she said.
"What?"
"Always think things are funny. It's why you're so... you know, cool and in control."
"Me? Cool and in control?" The idea surprised me. Rachel thought I was in control?
"Yesterday... last night... it got to me," she said. She shrugged. Then she smiled her
supermodel smile at me. "You grind my nerves sometimes, Marco, always joking the way
you do. But keep it up, okay? We need a sense of humor."
"Humor? You thought I was kidding? You mean, you and Jessica aren't both insanely in love
with me?"
"Dream on, Marco," she said.
54
Chapter 13
Ax finished building his distress beacon. He had it ready the next day, now that he had the ZSpace
transponder.
Now we just had to figure out where to lay our trap. It couldn't be any place that would ever
be connected with us. Not Cassie's farm, or the nearby woods. Not even anywhere in town, if
we could help it.
A couple days after the ant episode, we hooked up again in the fields of Cassie's farm, up
against the trees of the forest. This was one area we definitely had to keep safe. It was the
only place we had to keep Ax if this mission to help him escape failed.
It was Tobias who came up with the answer.
There's a gravel quarry. It's further inland. There's never anyone there. And it is just about
an hour's flying time away.
"If we're flying somewhere we'll have to get Ax a bird morph of some type," Jake said. He
looked at Cassie.
"We have a few choices in the barn," she said. She bit her lip, thinking. "We have a northern
harrier that was poisoned. About your size, Tobias."
"Ax? Do you mind picking up a bird morph?" Jake asked.
l have admired Tobias's shape. It is truly wonderful in every way. The sharp talons. The
beak. Much better than the human body. Not that I mean to offend. It is just that humans have
no natural weapons. I miss my tail when I am in human morph.
"No offense taken," I said. "But you're wrong about humans having no natural weapons. You
marinate human feet in a pair of old tennis shoes for a few hours on a hot day and you'll see a
deadly weapon. The dreaded stink-foot."
"Okay. That's settled," Jake said. "Now, let's get down to details. If we're going to call down
a Bug fighter we need to have a plan ready. Saturday should be the day, I think."
"As long as it doesn't involve ants," I said. I meant it as a joke. But no one laughed.
"No ants," Jake agreed quietly.
I shook my head in amusement. "You know, we're talking about taking on Hork-Bajir and
Taxxons. I used to think they were the scariest things in the world. But it's the little ant that
scares me worst now."
When the meeting broke up I hung around till Jake was done saying good-bye to Cassie.
Jake and I walked home together. For a while we talked about the normal kinds of things we
used to talk about before. Before our lives changed.
55
We talked about basketball and disagreed over which was the best NBA team. We talked
about music. Neither of us had bought a new CD recently. We even talked about whether
Spiderman could kick Batman's butt or vice versa.
You know, stupid, normal, everyday stuff.
I was stalling because I didn't want to have to tell him what I had decided.
But Jake's been my friend forever. He knows me.
"Marco? What's the problem?"
"What do you mean?"
"I mean, you haven't said a single mean-yet-funny thing the whole way. That's not you."
I laughed. Then, I just blurted it out. "This is my last time," I said.
"What do you mean?"
He knew exactly what I meant, of course. "I'm in for this time, but that's it. No more after
that. And I'm serious. No one is going to 'guilt' me into it. I've done enough."
He thought about that for a while as we walked. "You're right. You have done enough.
You've done a million times more than 'enough.'"
"It's just been too many close calls."
"Yeah."
"One of these days we aren't going to pull it off, you know? Ten more seconds and those ants
would have had us. And before that it was a pot of boiling water. And before that I was
practically killed by sharks. I mean, come on. Enough is enough."
"You're right," Jake said.
"Yeah."
I was surprised that he took it so well. I guess I shouldn't have been. We all kind of treat Jake
like he's the leader, but he's never been pushy about it.
"What are you going to do Sunday?" he asked.
That took me by surprise again. "I don't know. Some Sundays we go to my mom's grave.
Leave flowers and all. But this is the two-year thing." I shrugged. "I don't know, man."
He just nodded.
"But I'll tell you one thing, Jake. A year from now I don't want my dad going to leave flowers
at two graves."
56
Chapter 14
This is wonderful! Wonderful! Flying!
The six of us were all together. Flying. It was the first time for Ax. He just kept saying how
wonderful it was. He wouldn't shut up. It was the most excited he'd been since he'd
discovered coffee.
Which was cool, because flying really is wonderful.
These are excellent eyes! Ax said. Far better than your human eyes. Even better than my
Andalite eyes.
Yes, birds of prey usually have great daytime vision, Tobias said. I think mine may
actually be a little better than yours, though.
I doubt that, Ax said. lt is hard to imagine better vision than this.
Remember the good old days? I asked. When we used to argue over who had the best
jump shot? Now it's who has the best bird eyes.
We were sailing above a patch of woods. It was almost solid green below us. We had risen
high on a beautiful thermal. A thermal is a warm bubble of air that acts like an elevator,
letting you soar high with almost no effort.
We hoped there were no bird-watchers down in the woods. We made a very unlikely flock - a
red-tailed hawk, a falcon, a harrier, a bald eagle, and two ospreys. We kept some distance
between us so it wouldn't be too obvious that we were together.
Also, the eagle, who was Rachel, was carrying something that looked like a small TV remote
control. She was the biggest bird. She got stuck lifting the weight.
I have an idea, I said. Let's just blow off this suicide mission and spend the day flying
around.
Sounds good to me, Cassie said. She meant it to be lighthearted. It sounded just a little too
serious.
There's the quarry, Tobias announced. Dead ahead.
Dead ahead. Excellent choice of words, I said.
We made a large circle over the area, looking for anyone who might be in the woods. But
there was no one.
We spiraled down from the sky. Down into the deep, open gash in the earth that was the
gravel quarry. It was a desolate place. Just a big hole in the ground with some water in the
lowest spots.
A few minutes later we were back in our usual forms. Minus shoes, of course. And wearing
our motley collection of morphing clothes.
57
"We look like a trapeze act from a cheap circus," I said. "Way too much Spandex."
"Don't start with the uniforms again," Rachel said.
It was an old debate. I would say how we needed some decent superhero uniforms. You
know, like the X-Men or whatever.
But now, I realized, I shouldn't be talking that way. As if we were all going to be together in
the future.
I couldn't tell if Jake had told any of the others that I was quitting. Probably he had told
Cassie. I doubted Rachel knew, or she would have said something. The same with Tobias.
And Ax? Who knew with Ax? He was still a mystery to us. It was one of the things I would
miss after I quit. I mean, how often do you get to hang out with a real alien?
That and the flying. I would miss the flying. But if I was out, I had to be out all the way.
I guess I must have looked morose, sitting there on a pile of rocks, thinking. Jake came over
and kind of gave me a shove. You know, in a friendly way.
"Come on. We need to go back under that overhang. Out of sight."
"Great," I said. "The rocks will fall and crush us and we won't have to worry about the
Yeerks."
There was a sort of shallow cave in the quarry wall. Not deep at all, but it would hide us from
anyone flying over.
"Well," Jake said. "Let's try this out. Ax? You ready to trigger that thing?"
Yes. I am very ready, Prince Jake.
Jake looked around at everyone. "You all ready to go into your various morphs?"
We nodded. All except Ax. See, we were all going to go into morph - our strongest, deadliest
morphs - in order to take care of the Yeerk crew when they came. But Ax didn't have any
thing but a shark, a lobster, an ant, and a harrier. We figured he was better off in his own
Andalite body, which was plenty dangerous.
"Okay, Ax? Do it. Everyone? Morph!"
"And let's keep our fingers crossed," I added. "Or talons, claws, or hooves, as the case may
be."
Ax pressed a button on the distress beacon. As far as we could tell, nothing happened.
It is working, he reassured us.
So, Rachel, Cassie, Jake, and I began to morph. These were all morphs we had done before.
There would be no battle to maintain control over the animal mind.
58
Rachel went into her elephant morph. We figured we might need that brute strength and size.
Jake slowly became a tiger. Cassie used her wolf morph. And I focused on my gorilla.
"What a freak scene this is." I laughed as the changes began. "Anyone who stumbled onto
this would think he'd lost his mind."
It was definitely odd. You haven't seen weird till you've seen pretty, blond supermodel
Rachel grow a trunk as thick as a small tree and ears the size of umbrellas.
Or Cassie, growing gray fur over every inch of her body, falling to all fours and baring long
yellow teeth.
And then there was Jake. Huge, curved claws grew from his fingers. A snakelike tail whipped
out behind him. Orange and black fur covered him. And when he was done he was a full
grown tiger. Almost ten feet from his nose to his tail. Easily four hundred pounds.
If something deadly can ever be beautiful, it's a tiger.
Bet I could kick your butt, I said to Jake.
Yeah, monkey boy? I don't think so.
Hey, I could stomp both of you, Rachel said. She walked closer, swinging her trunk and
flaring her ears out. A moving mountain.
This is so mature, Cassie said. Arguing over who could beat who.
Hah. You're only saying that because we can all kick your butt, wolfie, I pointed out.
As if! Cassie protested. You'd have to catch me first. And I could still be running long
after the three of you were worn out and fast asleep.
You have an amazing variety of animals on your planet, Ax said. Some day, when the
Yeerks are defeated, Andalites will come here simply to try out the many animal forms. It
would be like a vacation.
Joe Andalite, you've won the Superbowl! Now where are you going? I said, mimicking the
Disney World commercials. I'm going to Earth to turn into a lobster!
I don't understand^ Ax said.
I started to explain, but just then a red light began to flash on Ax's homemade distress
beacon. The response signal! They are coming!
Quick! Everyone to your places! Jake said.
He slunk away, liquid power, to hide in the shadow of a boulder. Rachel pressed back under
the shallow overhang. Cassie trotted to a spot to the right of Jake, and I tried not to look like
59
a four-hundred-pound gorilla behind a pile of gravel. Tobias flapped hard, struggling to gain
altitude.
SWOOSH!
It came in low, just above tree level, then disappeared before turning to come back.
A Bug fighter. Just as we'd planned.
Here's your ride home, Ax, I said.
60
Chapter 15
Swoosh!
The Bug fighter flew over once again, seemed to pause, then settled down toward the floor of
the quarry.
Bug fighters are the smallest of the Yeerk ships. They aren't much bigger than a school bus.
They have a cowled, insectlike look, except that on either side there are very long, serrated
spears pointing forward. So they look a little like a cockroach holding two spears.
The Bug fighter landed as gently as a feather.
I held my breath.
Wait for it, Jake said. Wait for it.
The hatch opened. Out stepped a Hork-Bajir Controller.
The Andalite prince, Ax's brother, had told us that the Hork-Bajir were a good, decent people
who had been enslaved against their will by the Yeerks.
Uh-huh. Maybe so. But what they looked like was a whole different thing. Hork-Bajir are
big, walking razor blades. They're about seven feet tall, two arms, two legs, and a nasty
spiked tail similar to Andalite tails.
There are sword-like blades raked forward from their snake heads. There are blades at their
elbows and wrists and knees.
I mean, let me put it this way: If Klingons were real, they would be scared of Hork-Bajir.
Get ready. Jake again.
The Hork-Bajir stepped clear of the Bug fighter. Then, he just stood there.
There will be a Taxxon inside, Ax reminded us.
Yeah. We know, I said.
Why was the Hork-Bajir just standing there? He should be looking around. After all, he was
answering a distress beacon. Why was he just standing there like he was waiting for
something?
On the count of three, Jake said in our heads. One... Two... Three!
"Tsseeeeerrrr!"
Tobias swooped, falling from the sky at close to a hundred miles an hour. He raked his talons
forward and hit the Hork-Bajir's face.
"RROOWWWRR!" Jake leaped from cover. He sailed through the air and hit the Hork-Bajir
with paws outstretched, claws bared.
61
The Hork-Bajir went down hard.
Jake rolled away as the Hork-Bajir slashed the air like an out-of-control Cuisinart.
But just then Rachel rumbled up, as big as a tank.
Okay, back off, Jake, Rachel said. I have him.
She pressed one big, tree-stump leg on the Hork-Bajir's chest and pressed him down against
the ground. She did not crush him, just held him like a bug who could easily be squashed.
The Hork-Bajir decided it was time to stop struggling and lie very still.
Too easy, a part of my mind warned me. Too easy. No Hork-Bajir Controller had ever just
given up like that.
But I had other problems. My job was to get inside the Bug fighter. Get the Taxxon pilot.
 Let's go! I yelled.
I ran forward, loping clumsily on my squat go rilla legs, swinging my massive, mighty gorilla
arms. Cassie and Ax were right there with me. Taxxons are disgusting, oversized centipedes,
but I wasn't worried. We were more than enough to handle a Taxxon.
But then -
Zzzzzzzzaaapppp!
A brilliant red beam of light sliced the air just inches in front of me. It blocked my way.
Zzzzzzzzaaaapppp!
Another beam of blinding red light. This crossed behind me. It exploded gravel into steam as
it traced a path!
Dracon beams! Ax cried.
I spun around, looking for cover.
Zzzzzzaaaaappppp!
Look! Cassie screamed in our heads. Up on the edge of the quarry!
I looked, as the dracon beams formed a cage of deadly light around us. The edge of the
quarry above was lined with Hork-Bajir. I looked left. More! To the right... more!
The entire quarry was lined with Hork-Bajir warriors, each armed with a Dracon beam. There
must have been a hundred of them. We were surrounded.
Completely surrounded.
62
Stay in morph, Jake snapped. Don't let them know we're human.
Let's charge them! Rachel yelled.
No! You can't even climb up that rock face. Don't be stupid!
Cassie called Tobias. Tobias! You can get away!
I don't think so, he said. No headwind. It would take me a couple of minutes to flap my
way up out of here. They'd fry me before I got clear.
The reality settled over us. The despair.
What are we going to do? Cassie wailed.
There has to be a way out! There has to be! Rachel yelled.
Not this time, I said grimly.
We were trapped. Outnumbered. Outsmarted.
Finished.
And that was when he came.
He looked so much like Ax. So much like Prince Elfangor. And yet, so totally different. The
difference wasn't something you saw. It was something you felt.
A shadow on your soul. A darkness that blotted out the light of the sun. Evil. Destruction.
Not the impersonal, programmed destructiveness of the ants. This was warm-blooded,
deliberate evil.
His body was an Andalite. He was the only Andalite-Controller in existence. The only Yeerk
ever to infest an Andalite body. The only Yeerk with the Andalite power to morph.
Visser Three.
Visser Three, who had murdered the Andalite Prince Elfangor while we cowered in terror.
Visser Three, who even the Hork-Bajir and Taxxons feared.
Well, well, he said, thought-speaking to us. I have you at last, my brave Andalite bandits.
Fools. Do you think we never change our frequencies?
Yeerk! Ax said in a silent voice loaded with hatred.
Visser Three's main eyes focused on Ax. A little one, he said, surprised. Are the
Andalites now reduced to using their children to fight?
63
Ax started to say something, but Jake snapped, Shut up, Ax! None of us communicates with
him. Give him nothing.
Ax fell silent, but he was practically vibrating with rage and hatred for the Yeerk Visser. It
wasn't surprising. Visser Three had killed his brother.
But Jake was right. We couldn't get into a conversation with Visser Three. The rest of us still
wanted to hide the fact that we were humans, not Andalites. We could too easily slip and
reveal the truth.
Visser Three seemed to be enjoying his big moment. What a colorful assortment of
morphs, he said. Earth has such wonderful animals, don't you agree? When we have
enslaved the humans and made this planet over in our image, we will have to be sure and
keep some of these forms alive. It would be entertaining to try some of these morphs
myself.
None of us said anything. At least not any thing that was human. Jake did snarl, drawing his
tiger lip back over his teeth.
Especially you, Visser Three said to Jake. That is a beautiful, deadly animal. I approve.
In fact, I was going to demand you demorph. But I have a better idea. You see, we have a
guest aboard the mother ship. It will be entertaining to show you to Visser One as you are.
I was sick with dread and fear. But not so afraid that I didn't notice a sneer in Visser Three's
tone when he said "Visser One."
Did you catch that? Jake asked me in the thought-speak version of a whisper.
Yeah. Visser Three doesn't like Visser One.
Visser Three must have given some signal, be cause at that moment his Blade ship appeared
overhead, shimmering into view as it decloaked.
The Blade ship is far larger than the Bug fighters, and very different. It is jet-black. It's built
like some kind of battle-ax from the middle ages, with two curved ax-head wings, and a long,
diamond-pointed "handle" aimed forward.
We're better off making a run for it! Rachel said.
lt would be suicide, I said. As long as we're alive, there's hope.
Yeah. Visser Three is taking us to the Yeerk mother ship to show off for his boss. Some
hope.
But Rachel did nothing. And I did nothing. And we all just stood there, under the watchful
eyes of a hundred Hork-Bajir.
They must have landed out of sight while we were busy watching the one Bug fighter.
Ax had used the wrong frequency. The Yeerks had figured out we were laying a trap. And
our trap had become Visser Three's trap.
64
65
Chapter 16
A couple of dozen of the Hork-Bajir leaped down from the high wall of the quarry and sur
rounded us. They kept their Dracon beams leveled at us as the Blade ship landed on the
quarry floor.
"Go, obey farghurrash there horlitl" one of the Hork-Bajir said, in the strange mix of English
and their own language that they use.
He pointed to the Blade ship. A door had opened in the side.
I can't fit in there, Rachel said.
But as she approached the door, the door widened to her size. It stretched and grew as if the
metal skin of the Blade ship were alive.
What a pathetic little crew we were, trooping inside the Blade ship. Weak and pathetic and
stupid to imagine that we could ever have resisted the Yeerks.
Visser Three was right. We were fools.
This wasn't even my fight, I thought. Not really. This wasn't my time to die.
I guess I wanted to feel angry. But what I felt was numb, as I trooped into the Blade ship with
the others. You know, like I wasn't really there, almost. I was past feeling anything, I guess. I
just kept thinking, It's happening. It's finally really happening.
The next day was Sunday. My dad would go to my mom's grave. Alone.
It would be a while before he would admit that I, too, was gone.
Just like when my mom died - there would never be a body.
Just like my mom.
This is not looking good, I said. I couldn't take the silence
anymore.
No. It isn't. But we're not dead yet, Jake answered.
Yet. Why doesn't that make me happy? I asked. I looked around at the others, all crammed
into a windowless steel cube. Black, dimly lit steel walls on all six sides. No door. It was like
a coffin.
We look like some kind of circus, I said. An elephant, a tiger, a gorilla, a wolf, and a
freak of nature.
That got some halfhearted laughs from the others. I don't know why I was making jokes. I
guess that's the way I am. When bad things happen, I tell jokes. But inside I felt sick. Like I
had swallowed broken glass.
66
Maybe we should just demorph, Cassie said. Maybe if they realize we aren't Andalites,
they'll let us go.
She knew that was dumb, of course. But when you're scared, you start grabbing at anything.
You want to believe there's a way out.
The truth was, there were exactly two possibilities. Visser Three would kill us. Or Visser
Three would turn us into Controllers. He would infest us with a Yeerk.
We should stay in animal morph, Jake said. I mean, the thing is, if Visser Three learns
we are human, he may go after our families next. He may figure we told them something.
Prince Jake is right, Ax said. The Yeerks will not want to take any chances that other
humans know of them.
It was true. I knew it was true. I guess I'd known it all along. But hearing it said, it made me
want to crawl into a corner.
My dad. Cassie's parents. Rachel's mom and her sisters. Jake's parents. Maybe even Jake's
brother, Tom, although he was one of them. Their lives were at risk, too.
Suddenly, a window opened in one of the walls. It just grew, the same way the door had
before. Like the steel was alive. It formed a round porthole, large enough for all of us to see -
even Rachel, who could only turn her massive head enough to look with one eye.
I gasped.
Below us, blue and white and so beautiful it brought tears to your eyes, was Earth.
Sun sparkled off the ocean. Clouds swirled over the Gulf of Mexico, a big spiral, maybe a
hurricane.
Look, Cassie said simply.
We looked. Through the eyes of the animals of Earth, but with the minds of human beings,
we looked down at our planet.
Our planet.
For now, at least. For a little while longer.
Then something different came into view, as the Blade ship rotated away from Earth.
This is why the Yeerks opened a window, Ax said. This is what they wanted us to see. So
that we would despair.
The mother ship.
It was a gigantic, three-legged insect. The center was a single, bloated sphere. The sphere
was flatter on the bottom, and from the bottom hung a weird, mismatched series of tendrils.
Like the tendrils of a jellyfish. Each one must have been a quarter-mile long.
67
Around the sphere were three legs, bent up, then back down, exactly like a spider's legs.
The legs are the engines, Ax explained. The tendrils hanging down below the belly are
weapons and sensors and energy collectors. That is also where the shipboard Kandrona is.
The Yeerks must bathe in the Yeerk pool every three days and absorb Kandrona rays. There
must be one on the planet below, too.
Yeah. We know, I said. Your brother told us. For all the good it did us.
It just hung in orbit, like a predator gazing down hungrily at blue Earth below.
I can't believe people on Earth don't see this on radar, Rachel said. I mean, it's huge. It's a
city!
It is shielded, Ax said simply. It cannot be seen by radar. And it would normally be
invisible to us. Visser Three is showing it to us. To terrify us.
He's doing a good job, I said.
I've never been in space before, Cassie said. I always wished I could. I always wanted to
see Earth, all in one piece like that.
It is a lovely planet, Ax said gently. Not so different from mine. Except that we have less
ocean and more grassland. I... I am sorry I brought you all to this. This is my fault.
I wanted to yell, "Yes! Yes, it is your fault!"
But Cassie said what we all knew in our hearts. Ax, you're only here because your people
wanted to protect us. Your brother and a lot of Andalites died trying to save us. Nothing is
your fault.
It was true. But sometimes, when everything hits the fan, you don't want the truth. You just
want someone to blame. One too many missions I muttered. This was going to be my last
one. Now... well, it will still be my last one.
I could see an opening in the side of the Yeerk mother ship - a docking port. As I watched, a
pair of quick Bug fighters flew in, dwarfed by the size of the opening.
A minute later, we entered the docking port and were suddenly bathed in deep red light.
Through the window, we could see Yeerk crewmen - Hork-Bajir, Taxxons, and two or three
other alien species, in simple red or dark brown uni forms. And there were humans, too. My
first reaction was hope. Humans!
But then I realized the truth. No. Human-Controllers. Yeerks. No different than the HorkBajir.
There was a slight shudder as the Blade ship came to a halt.
Ax? Jake asked. What's our morph time?
68
We have been in morph for forty percent of allowable time.
I did the math. So we've used up forty-eight minutes. Leaving what, seventy-two minutes?
Yeah, Tobias confirmed. Not a lot of time for you guys. Maybe Rachel is right. Maybe
we should just go out in a blaze of glory. Attack as soon as they open the door. At least we
can let them know we were here.
I saw Jake extend his claws, as if he were thinking about using them. He glanced at where the
door had once been, like he was measuring the distance. I knew that he was listening to the
tiger in his head.
Then he seemed to relax. No, he said. We have to have hope.
Cassie sidled up next to him and nuzzled him with her wolf's muzzle.
I guess it should have been funny. The wolf and the tiger, sharing a tender moment. But all it
did was make me a little jealous. They had each other.
We gave them a pretty good fight, didn't we? I said. Our little circus? We did some
damage to them.
Yes, we did, Rachel agreed.
Do... Ax hesitated. Then, Do humans fear death?
Yes. We're not crazy about death, I answered. How about Andalites?
We're also not crazy about it
Through the window we could see a lot of Hork-Bajir and Taxxons and humans running
around, racing to get somewhere. They were lining up. And now, I noticed, there were
distinct kinds of uniforms, one red-and-black, the other gold-and-black. The brown uniforms
were all around the edges, like they were less important.
Suddenly, without warning, the window stretched open into a large, arched doorway. Fetid
air rushed in, smelling of oil and chemicals and something else.
A ramp rose up from the steel floor outside to meet us. We were standing like a display at the
top of the ramp. All around, filling this side of the docking bay, were uniformed Hork-Bajir,
Taxxons, and humans. Most were in red-and- black. Perhaps two hundred creatures, standing
in stiff rows, arranged by species.
About a quarter of the total were in gold-and- black. There were more humans in this group,
but also some unusually massive Hork-Bajir.
Jake? I have a feeling. I don't think the reds like the golds.
I think they are troops of two different Vissers, Ax said. I...I think I overheard my brother
talk about that. Each Visser has his own private army in their own uniforms.
69
Swell. I wonder which group gets to have us? I said.
Far at the back of the rows of alien troops, there was a movement. A party of creatures walk
ing to the front.
Visser Three was at the center, followed by two big Hork-Bajir in red.
And just to his left was a human. A human woman with dark hair and very dark eyes.
That was when I stopped breathing. Because I knew. Even before I could see her face clearly.
I knew.
They marched up to the bottom of the ramp. A dozen soldiers leveled Dracon beams at us,
just in case we wanted any trouble.
Then, in thought-speak that all could hear, Visser Three turned to the woman beside him.
You see, Visser One. I have taken the Andalite bandits. The crisis is over. Your trip here is
wasted, and you can return to the home world.
Visser One nodded. She looked up at us with those dark brown, human eyes.
Eyes I knew. Eyes I remembered.
The same eyes that watched me sleep every night from the framed picture beside my bed.
My mother.
Visser One.
70
Chapter 17
I sat down. Very suddenly. I'm sure it looked funny. A big, hairy gorilla simply falling down.
I would have laughed if I'd seen it.
My mother. Not dead.
Alive!
I wanted to yell. "Mom! Mom! It's me, Marco!"
But Jake was in my head, a loud, urgent whisper. Marco? Don't say anything. Don't do any
thing. Do you hear me?
So I wasn't just imagining it. Jake had recognized her, too.
Marco? Listen to me, man. You have to hold it together.
My mother... alive.
My mom.
Come on, Marco, stand up. Don't make them suspicious. He was speaking just to me.
I could hear Jake. I could. But it seemed to come from far off. He didn't understand. It was
my mom. My mom!
Marco? That is not your mother. Not anymore. That is not her.
Jake? It's my mom. Look, it's her.
No, it isn't, Marco. Not anymore. They have her. She's one of them. One of them!
Why, Visser One, Visser Three sneered, you seem to have frightened the humanoid
one.
"It is called a gorilla," Visser One said coldly. "If you are going to be in charge of Earth,
Visser Three, you should at least learn something about the planet."
And take a human host body, like you did? No, I think not. Human bodies are weak. I much
prefer this Andalite host.
My mother looked at him and curled her lip. "I took a human host and learned about the
planet and the humans. And because of that I was able to begin the invasion that you have
now endangered with your criminal incompetence!"
Visser Three's deadly Andalite tail twitched, as if he was going to stab my mom... Visser
One. The red troops tensed up. The gold troops let their hands edge toward their weapons.
Ooookay, Rachel said. l think we were right. These two definitely don't like each other.
71
She didn't know, I realized slowly. Rachel didn't know. But she had never met my mother.
Neither had Cassie or Tobias. And Jake had kept our talk private.
Visser Three slowly relaxed. You would like to provoke me, Visser One, he said. But the
fact is that I destroyed the Andalite force. I shot down their dome ship. I killed Prince
Elfangor myself and heard his dying screams. And now I have eliminated this last, pathetic
rabble of Andalites.
My mom... Visser One... just smiled. "You want to be Visser One? You think you can
take my title? We shall see. The Council of Thirteen does not like Vissers who make
mistakes. And you have made mistakes. Be careful of your own ambition."
She snapped her fingers, and every one of the soldiers in gold turned. Then she walked away,
followed by her gold-uniformed troops.
That was not my mother. At least not the creature who called herself Visser One.
Visser One was the Yeerk inside my mother's brain.
But the sickening thing is, you see, that the host mind is still alive. It is still aware.
Somewhere inside that head, behind those painfully familiar eyes, my mother still lived.
Take it easy, Marco, Jake said. I know how it is. I know how much you want to do some
thing. But now is not the time. They'd cut us down before we got two steps.
I know, I said dully. I hated myself for not trying, but I knew there was nothing I could do.
I had to hide inside my morph. Never let my mother know it was me. Never let her know...
Slowly, heavily, I stood up. I felt weak. A very strange feeling for a gorilla.
I think right then, if I had been in any other morph I would have just surrendered and let the
animal mind take over. Let instinct rule, and wash away my human emotion.
But the gorilla was too much like a human. Its instincts were gentle. Like humans, it was a
creature with emotions. It could not protect me from the pain.
Don't tell the others, Jake, I said. You're the only one who recognized her.
Okay, Marco.
You can't even tell Cassie, okay?
It's okay, man. You are my oldest and best friend. You know that. No one will ever know
from me.
Visser Three still stared at us. I think he wasn't sure what to do next.
Six Andalites, he said. Six Andalite bodies that could be used by my most loyal lieu
tenants.
72
Ax exploded. And then there would be others like you, you filth! Other AndaliteControllers.
More unnatural abominations like your vile self!
Visser Three cocked his head thoughtfully. Why are you the only one who speaks? You're
right of course: Why would I allow anyone to acquire Andalite morphing powers? But you
are a child. Why do the others remain silent? And why do you all still hide in your morphs?
Curious. Very curious.
He seemed to think it over for a minute. Would he realize the truth? Would he figure out that
the reason we remained silent was so he wouldn't guess that we were human? Would he
figure out that's why we stayed in morph?
He seemed to shrug.
Take them back to a holding cell. Triple the guard. If there is the slightest trouble, kill them
73
Chapter 18
They marched us down a hallway. Rachel, still in her huge elephant body, filled the hallway
like our ant bodies had filled the tunnels in the sand. Tobias rode on my shoulder, unable to
fly in the cramped space.
The place we ended up was just like the bare, black-steel prison we'd been held in on the
Blade ship. But this time no window appeared.
There was dim light that seemed to radiate from the ceiling. But nothing else at all.
I slumped down in a corner.
What's our time look like, Ax? Jake asked.
You have only thirty percent of your time left.
Thirty-six minutes, Jake translated.
Thirty-six minutes and I'll spend the rest of my life as an elephant, Rachel said. Not that
the 'rest of my life' is likely to be much time.
For a while everyone talked about various plans for escape. It was all just talk. We knew we
were trapped. We knew it was over. We were aboard the Yeerk mother ship. It was huge. If
we had a week to learn our way around, we'd still have been lost in its maze.
There were hundreds, probably thousands of armed Yeerks - Hork-Bajir, Taxxons, and a few
other shapes we'd never seen before, and of course, humans.
Like my mother.
My mother - Visser One. Most powerful of the Vissers.
When had it happened? Had the Yeerks taken her much earlier? Had she already been a
Controller for those last years when she was with us?
When she had come to my bedroom to say good night, had that been a Yeerk slug, just
playing a part, like an actor?
When I tried to fake sick to get out of school, had it been a Yeerk who saw through my story
and kidded and joked me into admitting it?
Was it a Yeerk, handing out the presents on Christmas morning? A Yeerk, singing in the
church choir? A Yeerk, pulling the puppet strings of my mother's body when she dragged me
through J. C. Penney's and made me buy school clothes I didn't really like?
Was it a Yeerk I used to find making out with my dad like a teenager when they didn't think I
saw them?
All of it an act? All of it fake? For how many years?
How much of what I'd thought was my mother, had been... one of them?
74
One thing was sure. Her death had been faked. The so-called drowning accident. No body
recovered.
But the body had been recovered, hadn't it? The Yeerks' mission had been accomplished. The
invasion of Earth had been started. Visser One was leaving Earth in the hands of Visser
Three. And so she had to disappear and not leave any one asking questions.
There has to be something we can do! Rachel was saying.
Ax said, My people have a saying - grace is the acceptance of the inevitable.
Yeah? I said suddenly. Well, I don't accept. That's what they want. They want the entire
human race to lie down and accept the inevitable.
Jake turned his big, yellow tiger eyes on me. I saw Tobias's eternally fierce glare.
I stood up.
I have a saying for you. I got it from a fortune cookie. Fall down seven times, get up eight.'
You know what that means? That means you don't ever just lie there. You always get up.
You always come back for more. You never surrender. Maybe you die, but you never
surrender.
They were all looking at me now. Through the eyes of a wolf and a hawk and the big, sad
eyes of an elephant.
Ants, I said. We can morph to ants again.
Cassie was shocked. You're saying that? You? I thought you hated those ant morphs as
much as I did.
I did. But it may work. We morph to ants. Maybe there's a crack here somewhere. We
escape into the walls and the machines. We can hide, then morph into something more
dangerous, attack, and then disappear again. Maybe even find a way to destroy the
Kandrona.
That's nuts, Rachel said. I like it.
At least we can hurt them a little before they catch up with us, Jake agreed cautiously.
Except for Tobias.
You have to do what's right for the group, Tobias said. I'll have to take my chances. I'd
feel better knowing you guys were still out there somewhere, making trouble for the Yeerks.
It may work, Ax said. The Yeerks are not very familiar with morphing, except for Visser
Three. They may not expect an insect morph.
AII right, then, Jake said.  let's - 
The door opened. It simply appeared silently in the wall.
75
Standing there were three Hork-Bajir. They were wearing gold uniforms.
Lying on the floor were four other Hork-Bajir. They were each uniformed in red. They were
either dead or unconscious.
Don't move, Jake snapped as he saw Rachel and me tensing up for a charge.
The lead Hork-Bajir, a huge creature maybe eight feet tall with head blades that were more
than a foot long, eyed us.
He spoke. It was surprising, because he did not speak the usual strange mishmash of
languages the Hork-Bajir used. This one sounded like he'd been educated at Harvard.
"This hallway goes on in that direction for a hundred feet." He pointed to his left. "Then
comes a guard station, where there will be two Hork-Bajir and a Taxxon. From there, four
hallways. Take the one furthest to your left. Follow it to a dropshaft. Take the dropshaft
down fifteen decks. Directly ahead you will see escape pods."
He looked at Rachel. "You are too large in that morph to fit in the escape pod. You will need
to demorph when you get there. The pod is programmed to return you to the planet in the
same area where you were seized. The pod will then self-destruct. Do you understand?"
We all just stared.
It's a trap, Tobias said.
No. We're already trapped. They could kill us any time, I said.
Marco's right, Jake said. Why let us escape if they want to kill us?
This is one of Visser One's soldiers, Ax pointed out. It would be very embarrassing for
Visser Three if his prisoners should escape, no?
Politics, Cassie said, with a laugh. It's about politics! Visser One is making Visser Three
look bad. If we escape, it will be blamed on Visser Three.
"You will have to deal with any of Visser Three's troops you encounter between here and the
escape pod," the gold-clad Hork-Bajir said. "Leave. Now."
Ax? Jake asked.
Only fifteen percent of your morph time is left
That's about eighteen minutes. Let's do it!
Visser One's troops turned and marched away.
I'll go in front, Rachel said.
Okay. And let's move, Jake said.
76
Rachel squeezed her massive tonnage into the hallway. All right. Now let's see who wants
to try and stop me!
Whomp ! Whomp! Whomp! Whomp!
Rachel made the steel floor vibrate with each massive step. Her leathery sides scraped the
corridor walls so that I could only catch occasional glimpses past her.
The hallway was empty until we reached the guard station. Just as the Hork-Bajir had said.
Rachel didn't even slow down.
Whomp! Whomp! Whomp! Whomp!
I saw a flash of a Taxxon, foolishly running as if to cut her off. A few seconds later I had to
jump over the crushed remnants of the big centipede.
Look out! Hork-Bajir! Cassie yelled.
He exploded out of a side corridor, a red- uniformed Hork-Bajir.
Swooosh!
A razor-bladed arm sliced the air inches in front of my face.
More coming! Tobias warned. Both directions! All of them in red!
I can't turn around! Rachel moaned. She was too big, too tight a fit in the corridors to turn
and help, as half a dozen Hork-Bajir in Visser Three's livery came screaming onto the scene.
I knew it couldn't be that easy, I said.
Battle! Ax said, sounding like he was announcing a party.
I felt the same way. I was ready. I was mad and tired of feeling helpless.
The closest Hork-Bajir swung at me again and sliced a six-inch long cut in the matted fur of
my huge shoulders.
That was all it took. Like I said, gorillas are peaceful, almost gentle creatures.
But don't go making one angry. Especially not when a boy who wants very badly to hurt
some Yeerks is sharing space in the gorilla's head.
"Hoohoo hoo hhawwwrr!" I cried and swung a fist the size of a cinderblock into the stomach
of the Hork-Bajir. I gave it all I had. I put every ounce of the gorilla's muscle into the blow.
The Hork-Bajir was lifted clear up off the deck. His head slammed the ceiling. He was down
and out of the game.
77
Out of the corner of my eye I saw another Hork-Bajir leap at Ax. The Andalite's tail flashed
forward so fast you didn't even see it move. The Hork-Bajir staggered back, minus an arm.
Good one, Ax!
You as well! Hah hah!
I decided right then - I kind of liked Ax.
Rachel! Jake yelled. Keep moving. Left tunnel. Look for a dropshaft, whatever that is.
The longer we stay here, the more of these guys are going to show up.
Just then, right on cue, two more Hork-Bajir came up from behind us. You guys move! I'll
deal with them, Jake said.
The Hork-Bajir rushed us.
"RRRRRRROOOOOWWWRRR!"
Jake let loose with a roar that must have been heard from one end of the mother ship to the
other. It even scared me. And it sure made the Hork-Bajir hesitate.
He was on them, while they were still thinking about what to do next.
Hork-Bajir are very fast. But so are tigers.
One Hork-Bajir was down, with Jake sinking fangs into his snakelike neck. The other HorkBajir
looked around to make sure no one could see him, then decided he'd like to live. He
kept his distance.
Jake backed away but kept his face turned to the Hork-Bajir behind us. We trotted as fast as
we could down the hallway, now a scene of devastation.
It was like the ant tunnels. We could only try to escape. The longer we tried to fight, the more
the odds would turn against us.
Suddenly...
Ahhhhhhh!
Rachel! I heard Tobias cry.
It's okay. I found the dropshaft. I am... dropping.
What is it? I asked.
An elevator without a floor, Rachel answered.
Then I was there, at the edge of a long shaft that went down and down, maybe forever.
Rachel already looked small. Which was not easy for her to do.
78
He said to stop after fifteen levels! I reminded her.
Yeah? And how do I do that?
Think the number! It hears speech and understands simple thought-speak commands, Ax
instructed. Then added, At least that's how it works on our ships.
I'm slowing down. Cool!
More Hork-Bajir back here! And some of those other ones. The little wrinkled ones!
Cassie yelled. They're coming fast!
Here goes nothing, I said. I took a look down the dropshaft and jumped off into empty
space.
You know, if it hadn't been for the fact that I was just a few minutes from being trapped
forever in a morph, and if there weren't a dozen or so walking Salad Shooters after me, it
would have been fun.
I fell, but not too fast.
Fifteen levels, I thought as floors zipped past me.
Twelve levels down, I plummeted past a human Controller who was getting ready to step into
the dropshaft. He had a very human look of total amazement on his face. Possibly because
while standing there, he'd seen a flying elephant, followed by a gorilla, a wolf, an Andalite,
and a tiger.
Hork-Bajir, coming fast! Tobias warned.
I looked up the shaft. A big Hork-Bajir warrior was gaining on us. But there was nothing I
could do until he reached us.
He's mine, Tobias said. He flared his wings, flapped hard and was shooting back up the
drop- shaft toward the falling Hork-Bajir.
"Tseeeeer!"
Tobias's talons came forward, outstretched, and slashed the alien's eyes.
"Ghaahharrr!"
The Hork-Bajir clutched at his face. I guess he was too distracted to think about what floor he
was heading to. He shot past us as we slowed to step onto the fifteenth level.
Hard floor under my feet again! A very good feeling.
Rachel! You have to demorph! I reminded her.
Already working on it, she said.
79
She was shrinking even as she lumbered along.
The escape pods! Ahead there! Ax cried.
They were only a dozen feet from us. A few seconds more and we would make it.
Rachel stumbled. She was half-human, half-elephant. A nightmare of pink and gray, with
huge ears and human hair and fat arms and legs that had no feet.
I reached down and swept her up with my powerful arms. She was still large, maybe three
hundred pounds. But not too much for me to carry.
We reached the door of the escape pod.
It closed behind us as we wedged our over sized bodies inside.
Ax! Time! Jake yelled.
Five percent of the time remains!
Six minutes. Morph out!
There was a surge as the escape pod ejected from the underside of the Yeerk ship.
My dense black fur was already starting to disappear by the time the pod rotated. I could see
Earth below.
Earth.
And as the tiny ship turned, I could see the Yeerk mother ship.
It was kind of a joke now, I thought. The Yeerk mother ship. My mother on the Yeerk mother
ship.
Hah hah.
Before I became fully human again, before I lost the ability to thought-speak and had to re
turn to words spoken out loud, I said, Jake?
Yeah, Marco.
No one ever finds out. No one can ever know.
Okay, Marco, he said.
My mother died two years ago tomorrow.
That's how it will be, my friend.
80
Yeah. But someday... Someday, somehow, in some way that I could not foresee, we
would win this battle. Humans and Andalites together would defeat the Yeerks. And we
would free all of their slaves.
All of them.
Someday, I whispered again.
Someday, Marco, Jake said.
81
Chapter 19
I guess there's no such thing as a nice graveyard. But the place where my mom is
remembered is as nice as it can be.
The grass is green. There's a tree nearby. It's always very quiet. You can smell flowers.
I hate going there.
My dad stood for a long time, looking down at the white marble headstone. It has my mom's
name. The day she was born, the day she died. And a message that says, "No wife, no
mother, was ever more loved. Or more deeply missed."
My dad and I stood a few feet apart. We didn't say anything. We both just kind of cried.
You probably wouldn't think I was the kind of guy who would cry. Mostly I don't. Mostly I
make jokes about things. It's better to laugh than to cry, don't you think?
I do.
Even when the world is scary and sad. Especially when the world is scary and sad. That's
when you need to laugh.
"Two years," my dad said. It surprised me.
"Yeah," I said. "Two years."
He took a deep breath. Like it was hard for him to breathe. "I... I... look, Marco, I've been
thinking."
"Yes?"
"I haven't been a very good father to you." It wasn't a question, so I didn't say anything.
"Your mom..." He had to stop for a moment to get his voice under control. "Your mom
would not be happy about the way I've been these last two years."
What could I say? I decided to say nothing.
"Anyway. I talked to Jerry the other day."
Jerry was his old boss. Back when he had a regular job.
My dad shrugged. "I guess we have to live, huh? I mean, we can't... you know." Another
heavy breath. "Your mom wouldn't want us to give up, would she? Anyway, I'm going in
Monday to talk to Jerry about getting back to work. You know... see if I still remember how
to even turn on a computer."
It was a big thing. A big decision. I guess what I should have done was run over to give him a
hug and tell him I was proud of him. I was proud of him. But that's not me.
"Oh, Dad, you never could figure computers out. Especially games."
82
He stared at me with the blank eyes I had seen for the last two years. Then, suddenly, he
laughed.
"You punk kid, I've forgotten more about computers than you ever knew."
"Oh, right! So why did I always kick your butt whenever we played Doom?"
"I let you win."
I made an extremely rude noise. "Yeah? How about if we just go home and play a game so I
can show you how totally wrong you are?"
I couldn't stop him from giving me a hug. I guess I didn't mind all that much.
We walked away from my mother's gravestone. The stone that marked the death of a woman
who was not dead.
I raised my eyes up to the sky. The blue sky of Earth. My home.
She was probably gone from the mother ship, now. Off to some other corner of the galaxy.
But wherever she was, no matter how far, I would find her.
Someday...




Chapter One
I'm Jake.
Just Jake. You don't need to know my last name, and I can't tell you, anyway. My story is full of
small lies. I've changed people's names. I've changed the names of places. I've changed small
details here and there.
But the big stuff is true.
All of it.
The Yeerks are here. On Earth. That is true.
The Yeerks have made Controllers of many humans. They have inserted their gross, sluglike
bodies into people's brains, and made them into slaves - Controllers. That is true.
Controllers are everywhere. My town. Your town. Everywhere.
They can be anyone. The policeman on the corner. The teacher in your school. Your best friend.
Your mother or father. Your brother.
I know. Because my brother Tom is one of them.
Tom is a Controller. A slave to the Yeerk in his head. If he knew who I really was - what I really
was - he would have me killed. Or turned into a Controller, like him.
That's what my world is like now. A world where the enemy is everywhere. Even sitting across
from me at the breakfast table on a Saturday morning, which is when this part of the story
begins.
"Hey, midget, what's up?" Tom asked as I sat down. That's one of the things he calls me.
Actually I'm kind of big for my age. Almost as big as Tom. But it's a joke we've had for years.
You know how it is.
"Not much," I said. "What's up with you?"
"Oh, I'm going to a meeting."
"The Sharing?" I asked, trying to sound casual. The Sharing is this group that tries to pretend
like it's some kind of combined Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts. It's really a front organization for
Controllers. The leadership council of The Sharing is made up of high-ranking Controllers.
"Yeah. We're doing some cleanup in the park.
You know, do our part for the community and all. Then we're having a barbecue afterward." He
gave me a serious look. "You really should join, you know. We'd get to spend more time
together."
3
I felt a wave of sickness. I tried not to show it. It wasn't Tom talking. It was the Yeerk in his
head. The Yeerk who wanted to take my body and use it as a host for one of his fellow slugs.
As I sat there across the table from him, I was trying to decide something. I was trying to decide
whether I would have to ever destroy him. Destroy my brother, who was not my brother. Not
anymore.
"Maybe I will join some day," I said. Like when hell freezes over, I added silently. I poured
myself some Wheaties and milk. "So you'll be out for a while?"
"All morning. Mom and Dad are out playing tennis, you'll have the house to yourself. Throw a
party."
"Uh-huh," I said, and spooned up some cereal.
It was hard not to just yell at him. To let him know that I knew all about him. What he was. What
he was doing.
At least, some of what he was doing. I had been spying on my brother. He was rising fast in the
leadership of The Sharing. He was a very loyal Controller. The Yeerk in his head had been
promoted.
And he was involved in some new plan. A very big new plan.
A plan I had to stop. Even if ...
"Well, take it easy, midget," Tom said, sounding just like he'd always sounded.
"You, too."
I waited till Tom was gone. I was alone. It was time.
I went through the house, room by room, making sure no one was there. Then I got the little
matchbox I'd hidden in my desk drawer. I could hear a scrabbling noise coming from in side. I
slid the matchbox open.
I shuddered.
It was a nice, big cockroach. Brown and glossy and about an inch long.
Its antennae waved eagerly. The roach tried to force its way out of the box, but I held my hand
over it.
I could feel the roach antennae tickling the bottom of my palm. It was pushing, trying to get
away.
I focused on the roach. Thought about it. Pictured it.
4
The roach stopped moving and lay still. Not dead, just quiet. The way animals always get when
you "acquire" them.
I slid two fingers into the box to get a better contact with the roach. It felt hard and dry. I
shuddered.
I absorbed the cockroach's DNA pattern. It was becoming part of me. The DNA - the genetic
pattern - of many animals was a part of me now. Tiger. Dolphin. Flea. Falcon. Trout. Green
anole lizard.
I have the power to morph. To become any animal that I can touch. The power was given to us,
to me and my friends, by an Andalite prince moments before he was murdered by the Yeerks.
I have flown through the sky on my own out stretched wings at more than a hundred miles an
hour. I have been a dolphin locked in deadly battle with sharks. I have felt the awesome power of
the tiger, and experienced the terrible loss of self, the emptiness and horror of becoming an ant.
It was the gift of the dying Andalite. A powerful weapon for us to use in resisting the Yeerks.
It was also a dangerous, deadly curse. Like any weapon, I guess.
And now I was preparing to become a cock roach. It would be the ideal way to infiltrate The
Sharing's new headquarters building. The leadership meeting was in a couple of days. I wanted
to be there. But the Yeerks had grown cautious lately.
They knew we were out here. They believed, wrongly, that we were a group of Andalite
warriors, but they knew that morph-capable enemies were hunting them. Opposing them.
Hurting them.
Sometimes hurting them very badly.
Tom. My brother. Could I destroy my own brother?
"You don't have to make that decision yet," I said aloud. "All you have to do now is try out this
roach morph."
All I had to do now was become a cockroach.
Cockroaches are not my favorite animals. But I knew a cockroach would be ideal for penetrating
a guarded building. Roaches can go any where.
You may have noticed that fact.
I put my dog, Homer, out in the yard. I closed the curtains in my bedroom, making it dark as
possible.
5
"Oh, man, the things I do with my spare time," I muttered. I thought of calling Marco and asking
him to come over. Marco is my best friend. He's the one who actually came up with the word
"Animorph."
"No," I said. "Do this yourself."
The others were all tired. We'd had a rough time lately. Too many close calls. We needed a rest.
Time to deal with normal stuff, like school. Our grades had been suffering since we'd be come
Animorphs.
Besides, this had to be my decision. Tom was my brother.
I took a deep breath. I braced myself. I took another deep breath.
"Okay, Jake," I said. "Let's do it."
The first mistake I made was standing in front of a full-length mirror.
It was dark in the room, but there was still enough light for me to see the changes.
Big mistake. Morphing is never pretty. It is always unpredictable. In fact, if you saw it
happening and didn't know what was going on, you'd end up screaming for about two weeks
straight.
The first feeling was of shrinking. It's exactly like falling. Like you're falling forever. I watched
myself shrink in the mirror. It didn't look as bad in the mirror as it felt.
But what really did look bad was my skin as it began to be covered by an armor plate of brown
cockroach shell.
"Aahhh!" I yelped in surprise.
My fingers melted together and formed a single, many-jointed bug leg. Antennae jumped out of
my forehead. They seemed to stick out forever, then curl back, like they were being blown by a
wind.
My waist was squeezed, and the lower part of my body swelled, forming a swollen insect
abdomen. Swollen and brownish yellow with ripples, sort of like the Michelin man.
Then, when I was about a foot tall, I felt the last of my bones dissolve. I could actually hear it
happening. My spine had been grinding as it shrank. Then, suddenly, I heard a squishy sound, as
all my internal organs lost their bone support.
My skull melted away. It was the last sound I heard clearly, as my ears and human sense of
hearing faded.
I was a bag of loose guts. Almost deaf. Half-blind, as my human eyes shrank and the lenses
became distorted.
6
My exoskeleton got harder and stiffer and stronger. My wings, glossy and crisp, covered my
back. They overlapped at the edges, like the metal plates of a suit of armor.
Extra legs suddenly sprouted from my chest. Only it wasn't exactly a chest anymore. I was a
stunted, six-inch-long bug, with a few disintegrating strands of brown hair and shrunken, but still
somewhat human, eyes.
Not attractive. Not even slightly.
Then I lost my eyes. It took a second to even realize that I could still see. Then, oh yes! Yes, I
could see. But not the way I saw with human eyes.
A weird, wavy mountain seemed to wrap all around me - my clothes. They looked different, blue
and green and gray. Kind of. It's hard to describe, exactly. I couldn't see very far, just a few feet.
And what I could see was shattered into dozens of little images. I saw little bits of vast fibrous
walls - my socks. And dark tunnels made of thick slabs of what could have almost been wavy,
corrugated concrete - the legs of my jeans.
The fibers of the carpet looked gray-green to me, and as big as ropes. My hairy, jointed roach
legs would catch in the fibers as I tried to move.
I felt the roach brain surfacing. I'd been through it before. It's different each time, depending on
the animal.
Sometimes it's a bunch of raw energy and fear that takes over your own mind so you think you're
going crazy.
But not the roach brain. I didn't feel great hunger. I didn't feel great fear. The roach was . . . calm.
Confident. Unworried.
I laughed. I mean, in my head I laughed, be cause I no longer had a mouth or a throat or any
thing at all that would make a laugh.
I was so tensed up, expecting the cockroach to be a bundle of energy and fear. But mostly it just
felt like resting.
The roach brain wanted to take a nap.
Cool, I thought. It's gross. It's disgusting. Marco and the others will hate the idea, but when I tell
them how easy it is to handle -
VIBRATION!
Get ready. Get ready. What was it? Get ready.
LIGHT! LIGHT! LIGHT!
7
Chapter 2
RUN! Run from the LIGHT!
Imagine being in one of those race cars at the Indianapolis 500.
Now imagine that instead of sitting in one, you are strapped facedown underneath one. Your
nose is about a tenth of an inch from the road and you're going 180 miles an hour.
That's what it was like when I ran. My roach legs powered like something from a Roadrunner
cartoon. I blew out from under the folds of my own clothing. I blew across that carpet. I was
rocket-propelled.
Someone had put the light on in my room. And when that light came on, my roach brain stopped
being calm and relaxed.
Zoooom! Three miles an hour. That's very fast when you're only an inch long.
Vibration . . . vibration . . . vibration . . .
Heavy steps rattled the floor. They vibrated up through my legs. My tiny roach brain knew what
they meant. Something very, very big was walking around.
Chasing me! RUN!
Zoom! across the carpet. Suddenly, a wall!
Up? Left? Right? Which way?
Vibration . . . vibration . . . vibration . . .
Wait! A crack. It wasn't much of a crack. Just enough space to slip a quarter through. No way I
could fit.
Or could I?
My underside scraped the floor. My hard brown wing cover scraped the bottom of the baseboard.
But I barely had to slow down.
I was in the wall! Hah! The big things that rattled the floor would never catch me now. I was
safe here. A nail as thick as a tree trunk stuck up from the wood. I went around it.
On either side of me I saw bright, straight lines of light that seemed to go on forever. They were
the cracks beneath the baseboards. To one side a thick, shiny slab with irregular edges intruded
into the wall - the edge of the kitchen linoleum.
High above I could see other lights, more circular and dimmer. These were the holes where pipes
entered the wall.
8
AHHHH!
Something moving! Close by. Oh, gross! A cockroach!
Get a grip, Jake! I told myself. You're a cock roach, too! But still, you just don't want to be faceto-face
with a roach as big as you are. I mean, he was right at eye level. The other roach's
antennae felt me, sweeping over me, tangling briefly with my antennae.
We said "hi." At least, we said the roach ver sion of "hi." Which wasn't really "hello." It was
more like, "Oh, you're a roach, too."
Now, in the darkness inside the wall, I felt calmer. The electric fear was gone. The suddenness of
the light had been the problem. That and the vibration.
I could still feel the vibrations, but they were different now. Further away.
Okay, I'd had enough of being a roach. It was time to get to some safe place, demorph and find
out who had been in my room.
Why was someone in my room? A few minutes earlier, and they would have caught me in midmorph.
Stupid of me. Stupid, stupid.
Where could I go to demorph? The garage? Yes, the garage. There weren't any mirrors, and I
sure didn't want to watch myself morph again.
Through the kitchen, out under the back door; that was the way.
I went to the bright crack ahead of me, the kitchen. I scampered up on the ledge of linoleum. I
stuck my head and antennae out beneath the baseboard. The vibrations were all far away. In
some other room.
I emerged from the crack. Over my head was an incredibly high canyon. It went up and up, far
higher than I could see. Two parallel walls, just a few body lengths apart. Of course. The
refrigerator. I was behind the refrigerator. One side of the "canyon" was the kitchen wall, the
other side was the back of the refrigerator.
Someone really should sweep back here. There were dust bunnies the size of couches.
But no problem. I was getting the hang of it now. Follow the baseboard. To the next wall. Turn
right, and then there would be the door.
No problem. I was in charge.
Some big barnlike structure was ahead of me. It looked like one of those old-fashioned covered
bridges.
Huh. Probably an old matchbox.
9
I went in, trotting along on my six jointed legs.
Wait. I wasn't moving anymore.
What the . . . ?
I tried to run.
I was stuck!
I tried again. One leg was free, but the others were frozen in place. What was ... I felt around
with my antennae.
Now my antennae were stuck!
I couldn't move. I couldn't move at all!
I was trapped!
10
Chapter 3
So?" Rachel demanded. "What was it? How did you get trapped?"
"I'll bet I know," Marco said, grinning sardonically, which is the only way he knows how to grin.
"Jake checked in, but he couldn't check out."
I nodded. "Roach Motel. I walked into a stupid Roach Motel. I ran right onto the sticky paper
and, man, I could not move. Very frustrating."
"You know, you could do commercials for the Roach Motel company," Marco suggested. "Take
it from me, Roach Boy, these things really work."
It was later in the day, and we were in Cassie's barn. Rachel, Marco, Tobias, Cassie, and me. As
usual, the place was filled with wire cages, and the cages were filled with animals. Rabbits,
foxes, baby deer, eagles, opossums, mourning doves, all of them injured or sick. Some of them
feisty and ready to be released.
We were lounging around on bales of hay and piles of feed sacks. All except Tobias, who was up
in the rafters high overhead, and Cassie, who was feeding some of the animals.
Everyone seemed to think my roach experiment was funny.
Except for Cassie. Cassie was the only one not smiling. She was giving me a very disapproving
look. "Jake, you of all people should know better."
She was right. I knew she was right. But that just made me stubborn.
"Look, I was just trying out the morph to see if it would be good for us to use."
Cassie totally did not buy my argument. She put down the bucket she was carrying. She took off
her heavy work gloves. She came over and stood about a foot from me. Then she stuck her finger
in my face.
"Uh-oh," Marco said in a loud whisper. "Jake's in trouble."
"Big time," Rachel agreed.
"Jake," Cassie said, "don't ever do that again. Now, you are sort of the one in charge, but I am
telling you, don't ever do that again. Don't ever try some new morph without one of us there. Do
you understand?"
"Cassie, I was just - "
"Uh-uh. No. Don't tell me what you were just. Don't ever do that again."
Um, Jake? I think this is the point where you just say 'yes, ma'am,' Tobias said, in the thoughtspeak
that comes with being in a morph.
11
I hung my head. "Okay, Cassie. Sorry."
Rachel whistled appreciatively. "It's a new, tougher Cassie. I approve."
"I remember when she used to be so sweet," Marco said. "I didn't know her voice could even
sound like that. Plus, look! She now comes with a Kung Fu grip."
Cassie ignored them. Instead she gave me a private look, just between the two of us. I knew what
the look meant. It meant I care about you. Don't be dumb.
And the look I sent her meant I know. I care about you, too.
Okay, I realize it sounds corny. But give me a break. We'd been through a lot, Cassie and I. And
all of us. We'd grown pretty close.
To me, Cassie is an amazing person. For one thing, she handles all kinds of responsibility. Her
barn is actually the Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic. Her parents are both veterinarians and her dad
runs the clinic as a way to help injured wild animals. Everything from seagulls to skunks. And
Cassie helps with all the work, except for doing surgery. But I'll bet she could do that, too.
As for how she looks, well, she's very pretty. Kind of short. She only comes up to my chin, but
then, I'm fairly tall. But she's not one of those wimpy-looking short girls, you know? Not all
prissy. She's strong-looking. Mostly, when I picture Cassie, I think of her wearing overalls and
boots because of working in the barn so much.
I guess most guys would say Rachel is prettier. Personally, I don't think of her that way be cause
she's my cousin. But Rachel does look like some kind of blond supermodel.
Not that Rachel acts like Ms. Fashion. Just the opposite. If there's danger, Rachel is right there.
Usually a few steps ahead of anyone else.
Marco says Rachel's enjoying it all. That she's actually glad about all that's happened in our lives
since that night when we saw the Andalites' damaged spaceship land in the construction site.
Marco refers to Rachel as Xena, Warrior Princess.
But that's Marco. For him, everything is a joke. Except for his family. Or what's left of it.
Marco is small, with dark eyes and dark, long brown hair. Cassie says a lot of the girls at school
think he's cute. I wouldn't know.
Most of the time Marco and I totally do not get along. He says I'm too serious. Personally, I think
he's just a little too immature sometimes.
We disagree about everything. He actually tries to tell me that college hoops are better than the
NBA. Yeah, right! Please. What are you going to do with a guy like that?
We get on each other's nerves a lot of the time.
12
We're also best friends and have been since we were babies. I would do almost anything for
Marco, and he would do the same for me. Of course, he'd complain the whole time. Oh, man, can
that guy complain when he wants to.
The last member of our original group is To bias. Tobias used to be this kind of sweet guy with
wild blond hair. A dreamy sort of person with a really terrible home life.
Used to be.
I glanced up at him. He was perched on a rafter overhead. He was preening his wing feath ers,
carefully combing them out with his beak.
It's an amazing beak. It has a wicked, cruel- looking hook at the end - the better to tear open the
mice and rats and other small animals he eats.
Tobias is a red-tailed hawk. I guess maybe he will always be a red-tailed hawk.
See, there's one problem with morphing. A time limit of two hours. If you stay in morph more
than two hours, you stay forever.
Which is why Rachel asked me, "So? What's the rest of the story? How did you get out of the
Roach Motel before the time was up? I notice you are human again."
"More or less," Marco added.
I shrugged. "Well, I sat there for a while, trying to squirm .out, but it didn't work. I was stuck
good. But it was okay, because as I sat there I realized I could start to make sense of some of the
vibrations I was hearing. Some of it was sound. People speaking."
"What people?" Marco asked.
"My parents. My dad twisted his ankle playing tennis, which is why they'd come home early.
They were the ones who'd gone into my room, looking for the Ace bandage I have in my drawer.
They were the ones who'd turned on the light. Anyway, what could I do? I wasn't about to get
stuck in roach morph. And I could tell my parents were up in their bedroom. So I demorphed."
Wait. Weren't you behind the refrigerator? Tobias asked in thought-speak.
"Yeah. And it was very tight. But as I grew, I could push the refrigerator out an inch at a time.
Still, I thought I was going to suffocate back there. And then, just as I was getting human again,
my mom walks in."
That made them all lean forward.
"What?" Cassie demanded. "Your mom? What did she see? What did she say?"
13
"Well, all she could see was my head. It was normal, fortunately. And what she asked me was,
'Jake? Why are you back there? And while we're at it, why do you have the top of a Roach Motel
stuck in your hair?'"
Everyone got a good laugh out of that image.
Marco was the first to stop laughing. He was looking at me kind of sideways. The way he does
when he thinks I'm hiding something.
"Very funny and all, Jake," Marco said. "But you haven't told us why you were morphing a
roach. And don't give me that 'I was just trying it out' routine."
I stopped laughing. Sooner or later I would have to tell them. I would have to tell them every
thing.
"Okay. Look, I've learned something. For one thing, Tom is getting more important to the
Yeerks. I think now he's just below Chapman as a Controller."
Rachel gave a low whistle.
Chapman is our assistant principal at school. He is also the most important Controller we know
about.
"Tom is careful about not letting my parents or me overhear anything suspicious," I said. "But he
does make phone calls using our phone some times. I've been checking the automatic redial
when he's done. So I know some of the people he's calling."
Marco laughed. "Cool. Jake the superspy. Nice trick."
And who is Tom calling? Tobias asked.
"Doctors. Five different doctors. I looked them up in the phone book. They all practice at the
same hospital. The same wing of the hospital, at something called the Berman Clinic. Berman is
one of the doctors Tom calls."
It took a few minutes for the facts to sink in.
"Wait a minute," Rachel said. "Are you saying the Yeerks are running that hospital? Or at least a
part of that hospital? Why would they want a hospital?"
I hesitated before answering. I wasn't sure my guess was right. Maybe I was just being paranoid.
But Marco, who could teach a class in paranoia, had already figured it out, of course.
"Oh, man. They're going to use the hospital to infest host bodies. You check in to have your
tonsils out or to have a cast put on your broken arm. You check out as a Controller."
14
Chapter 4
Tom came home late that evening. He smelled like wood smoke and barbecue sauce.
My mom and dad and I were already at the table, eating dinner. My dad had his injured ankle
resting on a stool. We were having broiled chicken and potatoes and veggies.
As he walked in through the kitchen door, my mom said, "Tom, how was the big cleanup? They
showed some of it on the news."
Tom came into the dining room and took a chair across from me. "It was okay. We filled two
Dumpsters full of garbage and dead branches and stuff. Hey, what happened to your leg, old
man?"
My dad winced. "I tried for a shot I shouldn't have tried for. Twisted it."
"Did you have enough to eat?" my mom asked Tom.
Tom patted his stomach. "Burgers and dogs and chicken. Not as good as your chicken, of
course."
"Actually, your father cooked. He cooked by calling Gourmet Express and having it delivered."
"But I did microwave the sauce," my dad said. "That counts as cooking."
Tom winked at my dad. "Well, the stuff at the barbecue had to be better than dad's chicken.
Good thing I ate there."
"Just for that you get no dessert," my dad said. "And it's cheesecake. From Santorini's."
"Oooh, Santorini's?" Tom groaned. "I take it back. I apologize. I grovel. I beg. I love
Santorini's."
Homer came in, sensing it was time for table scraps. "Hey, Homer," Tom said. He scratched him
behind the ears and Homer got his happy- moron look, the look where his eyes glaze over and
his tongue lolls out of his mouth.
A totally normal scene. Around a totally normal dinner table. No one would ever have guessed
the truth. In my brother's head was an alien. A creature from another planet.
I asked Ax about how it works. Ax is the Andalite we rescued from the bottom of the ocean. He's
one of us now, I guess.
Anyway, I asked Ax about how the Yeerk slug lives in a person's head. He'd explained it to me.
How they can flatten their sluglike bodies. How they can sink between the crevices and cracks of
a person's brain. How they melt like a liquid into every available space. How they wrap their
bodies around a brain and attach their own neurons to human neurons.
15
Tom must have noticed me staring at him.
"What's your malfunction?"
I snapped out of my daze. "What? Oh, nothing. I was just thinking of something."
"You were staring at me. You were staring at my forehead."
I forced a laugh. My mind raced to think of a joke. "Really? I thought I was just staring blankly
into empty space. But then again, empty space, your head. What's the difference?"
It worked. Tom snatched up a dinner roll and chucked it at me. I caught it in midair a split
second before it would have hit my face.
For a moment we just glared at each other.
"Don't throw food," my dad said. "It's undignified."
"It's okay," I said. "Tom's not fast enough to hit me anymore. He's slowed down. Lost his touch."
Tom raised an eyebrow. "Don't push it, midget."
I smiled. It was a fake smile, but it was the best I could do. "You used to be faster when you
were still on the basketball team. I guess hanging out at The Sharing all the time, eating barbecue
and potato salad, must have slowed your reflexes."
You know, in the old days, Tom would not have put up with that. He would not have let me
challenge him and get away with it. He would have had me in a headlock and given me a
massive noogie till I begged for mercy.
But now he just gave me a cold, uncertain smile.
Maybe it was because he had changed. Maybe it was because I had changed. The silence
stretched between us for a few minutes, and my parents, feeling uncomfortable, made small talk.
"I have homework to do," I said at last. "May I be excused?"
"Come back down for cheesecake later," my mom said.
Tom caught up to me on the stairs. "I don't know why you're so against The Sharing," he said. "A
lot of the kids in your school have joined."
"I guess I just don't like to join things."
"Yeah? Well, don't dump on what you don't understand. What were you doing that was so
important today? While I was out cleaning up the park?"
16
I stopped and turned to face him. I was one step higher than he was. We were eye to eye. "Me? I
wasn't doing much of anything. Hanging out with Marco."
"Your loss," he said. "There are things that are cooler than hanging out with Marco. Cooler than
being on some bogus team. Important things. You could be a part of something . . . bigger. You
could be part of something great, not just another nothing kid."
He gave me a look. Like he could tell me incredible things. Like he could open up a whole new
world for me.
I could be part of something bigger. Some thing important.
I knew that kind of stuff worked on some people. That was the first step toward becoming a
voluntary host. That was how The Sharing started you out: talk of bigger, more glorious, more
interesting things that you could be part of.
"Thanks, Tom," I said. "But I don't want to be a part. I guess I'd rather just be one person. On my
own. One little nothing kid."
For a split second after I said that, he let the mask slip. For just a moment I saw an expression of
pure arrogance and contempt. Yeerk arrogance. Yeerk contempt.
The look said "We will have you, sooner or later. You and all the rest of your weak race."
Then it was gone, and Tom was shrugging like it was all no big deal.
I went to my room. I did some homework. Later, I went back downstairs and ate cheese cake
along with my folks and my brother. One big happy family watching TV and pigging out.
That night, I had the dream.
A dream that had begun to appear almost every night.
17
Chapter 5
"I can't believe we are actually going to practice a morph," Marco said. "We never practice. We
just do it, and when it's a huge disaster we try and deal with it then."
"We need the practice," I pointed out. "We're going in as spies. We're going to this thing to try
and hear what they are saying. And it takes a while to learn how to use the cockroach's senses to
understand sound."
"This would be a great horror movie. Or at least a book," Marco said. "Roachman."
We were in Marco's new apartment. It was the first time we'd ever used it. Probably because now
that Marco's dad was back at work, they had moved to a better place. I guess Marco used to be
embarrassed over his old place.
In fact, his dad was out, working late at his new job. I hoped the job would last. Marco had been
carrying a big load of family problems for a long time.
"Is it possible to die of total willies?" Cassie asked. "I mean, do you think we could someday just
gross ourselves right out of existence? I didn't even like touching a cockroach. How am I going
to stand becoming one?"
"Just don't be near a mirror," I suggested. "And don't look at each other while you're morphing."
Are these creatures frightening to humans? Ax wondered.
It's amazing how quickly we'd all gotten used to the fact that this guy from another planet was
with us. I barely even thought about the fact that an Andalite was standing there, looking like a
cross between a blue deer, a mouthless human, a goat with eyes on the ends of his horns, and a
scorpion.
The scorpion part is the Andalite's tail. It has a curved, scythe blade on the end. The Andalites
can whip that tail forward so fast you don't even see it move.
I sat on the edge of Marco's bed. Tobias perched just inside the window, looking fierce and
angry - although, of course, he wasn't.
Speaking of odd things I was getting used to. I mean, I was there with an alien, my cousin, my
best friend, and Cassie, and they were all getting ready to become roaches.
Except for Tobias.
And the weirdest thing of all was that it didn't seem weird anymore.
I watched as they all began to morph. I looked away when it began to get disgusting. When I
looked again, there were four cockroaches on the carpet.
18
Okay, Marco thought-spoke to me. We're bugs. Let's get this over with, because I have to
tell you - I have a major urge to step on myself.
"Okay," I said. "Can you guys hear me?"
Go ahead. We're ready. Say something, Marco thought-spoke. I couldn't tell which roach was
him. All roaches look alike.
"Hello," I said loudly.
Wait. I felt something, Cassie said.
"Tobias, tell them that was me."
That was Jake, Tobias translated into thought-speak.  He said 'hello.'
Okay, Jake. Do it again. Say 'hello' again, Marco instructed.
"Hello."
Yeah, I felt some vibrations there, Rachel confirmed.
"Hello."
That sounded like hello, Cassie said.
Jake? Marco said. Say 'I'm a huge dork.' I'll see if I can understand it
"You're a huge dork."
Very funny, Marco said. I couldn't actually hear what you said. But I know you.
We spent about an hour with Marco, Cassie, Rachel, and Ax learning to translate vibration into
human speech. They were repeating the learning I'd done while I was stuck in a Roach Motel
behind my refrigerator.
When they demorphed I looked away again. My dreams had been weird enough lately. I didn't
need any help having nightmares.
Cassie is the best morpher in our group, even better than Ax - who's an Andalite, after all.
Usually she can kind of control the process a lit tle. Once, when we were morphing birds, she
managed to turn totally human except for keeping huge bird wings for a few seconds.
It was really cool.
But even Cassie couldn't do anything to make a cockroach morph attractive.
It was disgusting. Flat-out disgusting.
19
You have such wonderful animals on this planet, Ax said when he had returned to his normal
form. Not that his normal form looked very normal, standing there in Marco's bedroom.
"Cockroaches are not wonderful," Rachel said, shuddering a little. "I mean, I'm sorry, but I don't
like those bodies."
"They're easy to handle, though," Marco said. "Not like ants."
We all exchanged a look. We'd had a very bad experience with ants. That was one morph no one
was going to be repeating.
"You know, guys, this mission doesn't really require all of us to go," I said.
"Look, I just said roaches are disgusting," Rachel protested. "I didn't say I didn't want to do it.
We need to know what's going on with that hospital. The best way to do that is to crash this
leadership meeting of The Sharing. And the best way to do that is with roach morphs. End of
discussion."
She looked around belligerently, like she was daring anyone to disagree.
"Yeah, but I can do it alone," I said.
"What's going on with you?" Rachel asked. "You know we're the Five Musketeers. One for all,
and all for one. Six Musketeers now," she corrected, looking at Ax.
What are Musketeers? Ax asked.
No one answered him. They were all just looking at me like I'd done something wrong.
"Normally, I'd be all for staying out of trouble," Marco said, "But I'm just curious about why
you're acting this way."
"It makes sense. One of us can go it alone."
"Are you worried about Tom getting hurt?" Cassie asked.
Count on Cassie to figure it out. I looked down at the ground. "Look, he is my brother. You guys
are my friends. What if we get into it and it comes down to a fight?"
Marco raised his eyebrows thoughtfully. He understood. "We don't hurt Tom, that's the first
thing."
"It's not that simple," I said. "He's involved in this big time. He's one of them. And he would . . .
look, he would kill any of us."
I hated having to say that. But it was true.
20
Not Tom, Tobias said. The thing that lives in his head. Never Tom.
I sighed. "I had this dream." I almost stopped talking right there, because I felt like a fool
bringing it up. "I know this is stupid. I know dreams don't mean anything. But I've had this
dream a couple of times."
"So? Tell us," Rachel prodded.
"Okay, but don't laugh. In the dream I'm in my tiger morph. And I'm stalking Tom. Following
him. On his trail. I'm feeling the tiger's eagerness. You know, that predator feeling. The hunger.
The desire to kill."
Tobias turned his head away. I knew why. Tobias was a predator now. He felt that eagerness,
that killing desire, every day. It still bothered him, I guess. He had always been such a gentle
guy. Back when he was fully human.
"Anyway, in the dream, I'm hunting my own brother. Only, when I get close ... he turns around.
And it isn't Tom anymore. It's ..." I stopped myself before I finished the sentence. I'd already said
too much.
"I just don't want anything to happen to Tom," I said lamely. "It's not just about what might
happen if there's a fight. It's. . . . Look, I think Tom is important to this whole hospital plan
somehow. I think maybe he's in charge. If we manage to stop this thing, who knows what they'll
do to Tom? I mean, maybe Visser Three just kills Tom's Yeerk. But we've all seen Visser Three
in action. He likes to make examples out of anyone who fails him. He could kill Tom."
Rachel whistled softly. "If we succeed, Tom fails. If he fails, Visser Three may kill him."
"That's about the way it is, yeah," I said.
"So, what do we do?" Marco asked.
"We forget this mission," Cassie suggested.
"And leave the Yeerks in control of a hospital?
A little factory for making Controllers?" I countered. "Why? Because my brother may be hurt?"
"Yes," Cassie said simply.
I hesitated. I wanted to agree. But how could I justify backing off for selfish reasons?
"We don't have to make a final decision now," Marco said. "We can go in. Learn what they're up
to. Decide then what to do about it."
I met Marco's gaze. I wondered what he was thinking about me. Only Marco and I know about
his mother. To everyone else, she's dead. Only the two of us know that she's really a Controller.
That her body is the host body of Visser One.
21
Marco, of all people, understood what I was dealing with. He had given me a way out of
deciding.
"Yeah," I said, nodding at my friend. "Marco's right. This is just a spy mission. There's plenty of
time to decide what to do, when we know more about what they are up to."
I should have felt relieved.
I didn't.
22
Chapter 6
How long do you think this will take?" Rachel asked. She checked her watch. "I set the VCR for
two of my favorite shows, but I forgot to tape the movie of the week."
"I'm taping it in case you miss it," Cassie said.
It was dark out, but not very late. The moon was up, but hidden by the clouds. We were walking
along the street, doing our best to look like a normal bunch of kids just hanging out.
Normal.
This sucks, Tobias said from high above.  I'm half-blind at night. Especially without
moonlight. I should have gotten myself stuck in an owl body. Owls are so cool. Aside from the
fact that some of them try to kill and eat falcons.
"How can you ever run in these bodies?" Ax wondered. "Two legs? It is absurd. Surd. Ubsurd.
Ubzerd. Not even a tail to help you stay up."
Ax was in his human morph. It's a combination of DNA from me, Marco, Rachel, and Cassie.
The result is kind of like looking at all of us at once, but in one body. It's really weird.
Ax had almost gotten used to having a mouth when he was in his human morph. Almost. He still
had a tendency to want to play with sounds, repeating them. Plus, the boy was dangerous when
he got around food. The sense of taste was just overwhelming for him.
"You know, Ax, now that you mention it ..." Marco started gyrating wildly, like a guy out of
control. "I only have two legs! I'm falling . . . falling!"
"See? I knew it must happen sometimes," Ax said, adding, "Happen. Hap. Hap. Pun."
I wasn't sure if Ax knew Marco was being funny or not. Ax might have a very dry sense of
humor. Or he might have no sense of humor at all. I hadn't figured it out yet.
"There's the place," I said. It was up ahead, at the end of the block.
It was a residential neighborhood, with older houses and a few kind of low-budget shops mixed
in. You know, thrift shops and car parts places and small restaurants.
Our target was a single-story, whitewashed building. There was only one door, and the windows
were high up, narrow and long. They were blocked off so that no one could see inside. There was
a small parking lot with a dozen cars in it.
Over the door was a sign: "The Sharing. Building a Better Life."
"Yeah, right," Marco sneered. "A better life for slugs from outer space. You notice the guy
standing by the door? He looks like he's ready for trouble."
23
A very large man stood by the door, muscular arms folded over his chest. But we'd expected that.
Marco and Rachel and I had scoped the place out ahead of time.
"Okay, we cut down this alley," I said. "That building down there is abandoned. The basement is
empty and unlocked. That's where we morph."
The basement was dark and depressing and smelled of mildew. I guess it used to be part of a
restaurant. There were still some old tables strewn around. There were also a lot of old beer
bottles and bits of garbage.
"Wonderful," Rachel said in a whisper. "This whole Animorph lifestyle is so glamorous."
Tobias fluttered in through the open door. Then we heard a thump.
Ow! Man, who put a pillar there? Banged my right wing.
"Great. This is the guy who's supposed to be looking out for us," Marco grumbled.
Ax had instantly begun to morph back to his Andalite body. It is not possible to go straight from
one morph to another. Just like we have to return to human form between morphs, he had to
resume Andalite form.
"Come on, let's do this and get it over with," Rachel said. "I'm going to be a roach in a filthy
basement. My mother would be so proud if she knew."
"Wait," Cassie said. "We agree on how this works, right? We're not looking for a fight. This is a
spy mission. No one do anything dramatic, like morph into an elephant and go on a stomping
spree."
Cassie was looking at Rachel. Rachel has an elephant morph. She's very fond of it.
Rachel laughed. "Absolutely. Spy time. Stealth is my middle name."
"Okay." I was a little embarrassed that Cassie had brought it up. She was trying to remind
everyone that Tom was one of the Controllers in that meeting. Trying to remind everyone that
we were just there for information.
"Let's morph already," Rachel said. "Come on. I'll miss the movie."
"Five little roaches. We'll be right at home in this dump," Marco said as he began the
transformation. "You will keep the rats from eating us, won't you, Tobias?"
Hey, I may not see that well in the dark, but I can still catch a rat, light or no light. I am the ratkiller
of the universe.
"Ax? You ready?"
Yes, Prince Jake. I am fully Andalite and ready to become your roach.
24
A few moments later, we were five cockroaches amid the scattered garbage on the bare concrete
floor.
Wow. That is one big beer can, Marco said.
A blue and white can towered over us, curving away into the sky.
Let's, urn, scurry, I said. Ax? You keep track of the time.
We took off, a little knot of fast-moving roaches, all running in the same direction.
You know, if this wasn't so gross, it would be kind of cool, Rachel said. Stairs! All right. A
little vertical rock climbing.
Tiny pincers on the end of my six legs grabbed the small protrusions of concrete and wedged
into invisible cracks. It all happened so fast and so automatically that I could run straight up the
cement step, almost as fast as I could move horizontally.
Up the riser. Over the edge. Zoom, to the next riser. Up. Over. Across. To the top of the four
stairs.
You know, you guys still give me the willies, Tobias said. You should see your selves. The
urge to step on you is pretty strong - if I had shoes. I never did like roaches.
This from a guy who disembowels live mice for lunch, Marco said.
Don't knock it if you haven't tried it, Tobias shot back.
In some corner of my mind I noted the fact that Tobias seemed more and more at peace with his
weird life - half-bird, half-human.
But mostly my mind was on the job at hand. We had reached the threshold. We scampered
across it and out into the alley.
The alley was a mix of gravel and cracked, torn-up blacktop. The blacktop was like running
across hard oatmeal, all bumpy and uneven. The gravel was more difficult. The pieces of rock
were as big as we were, and even with our six clever legs, there was a lot of stumbling and
slipping.
I'm going airborne, Tobias said. You're out on the sidewalk. Turn left. There's better light
out here so I'll be able to watch you from the top of the telephone pole.
Okay, we'd better spread out. Don't forget, these are Controllers. Yeerks. They believe there is
a group of Andalite warriors running around loose. In other words, they'll be on the lookout for
morphs. So act like normal roaches.
25
You mean I should crawl inside an open box of cereal? Marco asked. I had that happen once.
I almost ate the bug. Yuck.
We fanned out, staying several inches apart as we moved toward the building. I stopped when I
reached the whitewashed cinder block of the exterior wall.
Crack! Cassie called. l found a big crack here. I'm going in.
The rest of us waited. I felt obvious, just sit ting there. Obvious and helpless. The big guy at the
door could decide to step on me. I couldn't see him, but I knew he was there.
This is good, Cassie said from deep in the wall. I think we can follow it all the way inside.
One by one, we scurried to her location. I felt better when I was inside the crack. Until I thought
about what would happen if I tried to demorph in such a tight spot.
I didn't even want to start thinking about that.
We're going in, Tobias, I called to him. Get somewhere safe.
I'm cool, he said. Good luck.
We were traveling single file, sideways, along the crack. It was like exploring a cave. There was
no light, but my antennae felt the way, picking up the scent of the others, reading the tiny air
currents, sniffing for familiar aromas.
Then I saw a faint light that grew brighter as I advanced. Cassie was in the lead. It worked. It
goes all the way through. I'm inside.
I sidled up beside her. I could see through the crack opening now. I could see brilliant light. And
I could feel vibration.
The vibration of sound. Of speech.
I concentrated. It was impossible to tell much about the voice. Who it was. It seemed too high to
be someone old.
Was it Tom?
I listened to the words.
". . . the day is here at last. It is time to strike the decisive blow in the invasion of Earth."
 What is this, a Yeerk pep rally? Marco wondered.
Cassie started giggling - well thought-speak giggling - , and pretty soon all of us, except Ax,
were laughing silently. It was very nervous laughter.
26
We need to get out of this crack, I said. Spread out a little. We look too obvious just sit ting
here, and we should try to see if we can identify some of these people. Move out. But wait! Not
all at once!
Too late. We were all scampering down the wall from the crack to the floor. To anyone watching
it would have looked like "Invasion of the Roaches." Five roaches, moving all together, is an
easy thing to notice.
But I had forgotten one thing. Humans hate roaches. A human will spot a roach very quickly.
But Yeerks couldn't care less. Even though these were all human-Controllers, they were with
their fellow Yeerks now. They didn't have to keep up the "human" act.
No one stomped us. Although I waited for a big shoe to drop from the sky.
We separated a little, then headed along the edge of the wall, where bare concrete floor met
painted cinder block walls.
Hey, guys? Can you hear me? It's Tobias.
Just barely, but I can still understand you, I called back. Thought-speak gets weaker over
distances. Same as regular speech. Although walls and so on aren't a problem.
There's a car pulling up outside here. A limo. And there are two other cars with it, full of very
tough-looking dudes.
What are they doing?
Getting out, now. Like six guys. They have guns! I can see them under their coats. Now there's
a guy getting out of the back of the limo.
Who is it? Or should I say, what is it?
He's a human. He staggered a little, walking toward the door. He looks like a normal guy, but
all the others are acting very nervous. And ... I know this sounds dumb, but I get a bad feeling
from this guy .
Now I could hear the vibrations of many feet walking fast. They're coming our way now, To
bias. Thanks for the warning.
I tried to use my eyes, but they were hopeless at any kind of distance. All I could tell was that
several men had arrived and were marching through the room.
"My brothers-in-arms," some loud, booming voice said, "I present to you, our leader. Visser
Three."
There was a gasp from the group. There was a silent gasp from us, too.
Visser Three?
27
Visser Three had an Andalite body. He was the only Yeerk ever to obtain an Andalite body, with
all its morphing power. But surely, Tobias would have mentioned seeing an Andalite getting out
of a car.
"I see that some of you are surprised," a new voice said. "Surely you must know that I can morph
a human, as well as any other body."
Oh, man, Marco said. Visser Three can morph a human?
Certainly, Ax said. Just as I do. Humans are animals, after all. You have DNA.
The voice we now knew as Visser Three spoke in a hard, curt tone. It was odd, hearing his
words. We had only heard him thought-speak before. Now he had a voice. And, if we could only
see it, a human body. But he was too far away for our weak and distorted roach vision.
"This mission has two parts. One. We will use the front hospital to take involuntary hosts. I
expect to be able to make two hundred new Controllers per Earth month. We will concentrate on
police, broadcasters, writers, teachers, people in finance, and especially anyone in a position of
political power."
There was a murmur of excitement from the assembled crowd.
Just what we were afraid of, I said.
Unfortunately, Marco agreed. Man, two hundred new Controllers a month?
"You have done well recruiting human doctors and nurses, so that we now control the hospital
facility. But this brings me to the second part of the mission," Visser Three said. "Until now this
secret was known only to me and a very small group."
The room was almost totally silent, listening, anticipating.
"The second part of my plan is even more important than the first. In a few days, the governor of
this state will have some minor surgery performed. His secretary is one of us, and she has steered
him to our facility. He will check in for the minor surgery. When he checks out ... he will belong
to us."
No, Rachel gasped.
What does it mean? What is a governor? Is this some sort of prince? Ax asked.
Yeah. A prince. The governor controls the state police, I said. And the National Guard. And
the schools.
It's worse than that, Rachel said grimly. Don't you guys ever pay attention to politics?
What are you talking about?
28
Don't you know? Our governor is getting ready to run for president next year. A year from now
there could be a Controller in the White House.
A White House? What does all this mean? Ax asked.
It means that one of them could be the most powerful man in the most powerful nation on
Earth, I said.
And that would be the ball game, Marco said.
Then ... all would be lost?
Yeah, Ax. All would be lost.
29
Chapter 7
 Let's bail. We've learned all we need to know, I said.
Back to the crack? Cassie asked.
Yeah. We know the way.
I turned and headed back to the crack. It was only a foot or so away. In a few seconds we would
all be safe.
I could not believe what I had heard. It was insane! If the Yeerks succeeded, we were toast, pure
and simple. As long as it was a secretive war between us and Yeerks who did not want to be
discovered, we could maybe stay alive. But if all the power of the state police were turned
against us, too? The situation would be out of -
Suddenly, a strange vibration in the air above me.
DANGER!
RUN!
WHHHAAAMMMPP!
It was like someone had dropped an entire three-bedroom house an inch in front of me.
The impact was awesome. The wind it caused was like a small but intense hurricane. It whipped
my antennae back.
Someone almost stepped on me! I yelled to the others. Look out!
"Visser! Forgive my interruption. But there are several small insects here!"
A general murmur from the crowd, then one voice saying, "Don't worry, they are only
cockroaches. They are everywhere on this planet."
"Fool!" Visser Three exploded. "Do you think Andalites cannot morph creatures so small?
Someone kill this fool for me."
BLAM! BLAM!
I felt the world spinning around me. Someone had been shot! Was it ... Tom? Could it have
been?
A new rush of air overhead. I could see some thing monstrously huge falling toward me,
speeding down, ready to crush me.
I bolted.
30
WWHHHAAAMMMPP!
Millimeters from my tail.
"Kill those insects!" Visser Three screamed.
Everyone for himself! I yelled. Spread out. Run! Get into cracks! Let the roach brains guide
you!
I took my own advice and relinquished control to the raw instincts and cunning of the tiny cock
roach brain.
Say what you will about roaches. They're gross. They're disgusting. But man, when it comes to
staying alive, that primitive roach brain knew its business.
WWHHAAAMPPP!
WWHHAAMMMPP!
Aaaahhh! Ax yelled.
Ax! Are you okay?
Yes. Yes. Barely.
Huge feet, each the size of a Greyhound bus, stomped the ground. But each time, the roach brain
moved me in just the right way at just the right speed. They missed me by so little that I could
feel the leather and rubber scrape my sides and tail as they impacted around me.
I made it to the corner of the wall and hugged in there as close as I could get.
They're on me! Cassie screamed. I can't get away! Oh, man! I don't want to die like this!
Get to the wall! Get off the floor!
I was blazing along at top speed as shoes tried to kick into the corner. But all I needed was a
tenth of an inch and I could scrape past, uninjured.
SQQQUUUUEEEEEGGGEE.
A running shoe was being dragged along the corner, straight toward me. The soft rubber melded
perfectly into the space. It would crush me!
I saw it coming, a black wall. A black locomotive rushing at me.
I jumped!
31
I landed on the shoe as it came near.
Whooosshhh! I was flying through the air on a magic carpet made of canvas. The man kicked. I
lost my grip and went flying through the air.
I'm clear! I'm clear! Cassie called. l found another crack!
I felt like I was going supersonic. Like a jet, tumbling out of control through the air.
Wait! I had wings!
Too late.
Fwappp! I hit the wall. It should have killed me. It would have killed me if I had been a human.
But I weighed less than an ounce. The impact was hard, but not enough to hurt me.
I fell to the floor.
A tent of some sort - gray, black ... a newspaper! It was a crumpled piece of newspaper on the
floor. I dove beneath it and froze.
I looked up and saw that it was a photograph. I couldn't make sense of the photo, of course, it
was just big black dots of ink. I could make out letters, each as big as my head.
I'm clear, Ax called. I am with Cassie.
Good. That was two of them safe. Rachel? Marco?
I'm on a guy's sock, Rachel reported. He doesn't know I'm here. Wait. We're outside! I'm
going to drop off! Clear! Clear! I'm outside!
Marco?
Yeah, Jake.
Where are you?
I am in a place where I really, really hope no one flushes, Jake.
You're in a toilet?
They have a bathroom. It seemed like a natural place for a roach. I'm chilling for a minute, then
I'm going to try for the hole in the wall where the pipe goes. How about you?
I'm not so good. I'm under a newspaper, but they're still stomping all around. Sooner or later
they'll stomp here. I have to make a run for it. I'm going to try for the door. Once I get outside
they'll never get me in the dark.
32
Good luck, man, Marco said.
Yeah. You, too, my friend.
Then, my antennae picked up a strange new scent. Sweet. Oily.
Dangerous. Somehow, I sensed that . . .
It hit me in a flash!
Marco! They have bug spray!
I blew out from under the paper.
"There! There's one!"
Vibrations of a dozen feet running after me. And in the air behind me, a vast fountain that
seemed to be explode from thin air.
An upside-down fountain. Like a rainfall that came from a single point and spread out to fill the
air.
A droplet landed on me.
Then another.
I felt my legs stumble.
The door. I could sense it, just ahead.
WWHHAAMMPP!
A foot! A near miss. I was slowing down! I could feel my roach instincts
becoming scrambled.
I was poisoned. The nerve gas was beginning to work. My legs were tangling up. My antennae
were waving frantically, unable to smell anything but the deadly rain of poison.
"That got him!" a voice said.
"Don't crush him," Visser Three yelled. "He may demorph to save himself and we'll have
ourselves an Andalite!"
I was starting to twitch. I couldn't breathe.
And then, faster by far than the feet that had chased me, some new shape swooped down.
I tried to run, but I no longer could.
33
Three monstrous cables closed around me, and I was up, up, off the floor.
Hang in there, Jake, Tobias said. It's me. Red-tailed Airline welcomes you aboard, and I am
hauling my feathered butt outta here!
34
Chapter 8
Morph , Jake! Morph now!
Tobias had set me down on the roof of a Boston Market restaurant. It was the closest safe place
he could find.
I was lying helpless on tar paper and gravel. My legs were twitching. My antennae waved in
sanely. I was twitching and jerking and losing all control over my roach body.
But the human me understood what was going on.
I was dying.
I had watched roaches die from poisoning. I had stood over them and thought, "Ha, serves you
right."
Now it was me. Now it was my body that was failing. I was the one suffocating and jerking.
Jake! You have to morph out of this. Do it! Concentrated
I knew he was right. It was the only way to stay alive. But it was so hard to focus when I was
trapped inside a dying body.
I tried to picture myself human. I tried to form a mental image of myself. But that picture was all
mixed up with dolphins and birds and tigers.
And the dream . . .
I was in it now, as the delirium swept over me. In the dream . . .
I was the tiger. Moving with perfect silence. Each muscle like liquid steel. Every movement
controlled, calculated.
I could smell my prey. I could hear his clumsy human movements in the dark forest. He was
slow. He was weak. He could not escape me. I would destroy him. I would bring down my prey.
My prey . . . Tom.
I saw him turn to look at me. I saw fear in his eyes. Fear of me.
I settled back on my haunches, preparing for the final lunge. The killing lunge that would end
with my teeth sinking into his neck. My jaws crushing his spine.
He looked at me and held up his hands. "No!"
I leapt, uncoiling unbelievable power. I leapt, a huge, unstoppable hunter. I roared, a thunderous
cry of triumph that could be heard for miles.
35
And then I saw the tiger. Saw myself. Saw orange striped fur and ruthless yellow eyes and saber
teeth and claws that could rip open a buffalo, hurtling toward me.
Tom had become the tiger. And I was his prey.
I closed my eyes. And when I opened them again, I saw, right above me, fierce eyes staring
down from just a few inches away. The eyes of a hawk.
Are you okay? Tobias asked.
I raised my hand to look at it. Fingers. Five of them.
"I don't know? Am I okay?"
You seem to have all your major limbs and so on, Tobias said. But it was a weird morph.
You got poisoned pretty badly, I think. You seemed to be unconscious while you morphed.
"I'm alive," I said, feeling a little surprised. But of course the amount of poison that had almost
killed me when I was a roach was nothing to me as a human. "Where are we?"
On the roof of a fast-food restaurant.
"You saved my butt, Tobias."
No problem. I am your own personal Air Force, dude. Just call in the air support anytime you
need it.
I sat up. "How are the others?"
Worried about you. I checked up on them while you were coming out of morph. They're
scattered around, but okay. Everyone morphed back. Ax is already in human morph again.
Cassie has him with her.
"I guess I should get down from here," I said.
Yeah, Tobias agreed. So. Marco told me what you found out. This is major.
"Definitely major," I agreed. I stood up and began to look around for a way to escape from the
roof. I was too tired and rattled to morph again.
Marco says Visser Three was there. In a human morph. The guy who showed up in the limo,
right?
"Yeah, I guess so. I mean, roach eyes are pretty lame. I can only go by what I heard."
I saw him leave, right after I lifted you out of there, Tobias said.
36
I stopped looking for a ladder to the ground. Tobias was being too talkative. Too persistent.
"Tobias? What is it? What are you trying to get around to telling me?"
When Visser Three left, Tom was with him.
My first reaction was relief. Visser Three had ordered someone executed in that meeting. It had
not been Tom.
"How, um . . . how did they look together? Visser Three and Tom?"
Tom was the only one from the meeting who went with Visser Three, aside from his guards.
Tom was acting sort of careful around Visser Three. But he looked like he was pretty cocky
around the guards. It's hard to say, Jake. But if I had to guess, I'd say Tom and Visser Three are
tight.
"Yeah," I said. "I have a feeling maybe Tom is kind of responsible for a big part of this hospital
plan." I shut up and thought for a second.
"What will Visser Three do to Tom if this great plan is destroyed?"
Tobias said nothing. He knew the answer.
Those who fail Visser Three die.
37
Chapter 9
I saw the lane open up between Juan and Terry. A clear lane to the basket.
Thonk. Thonk. Thonk. My right hand dribbled the ball. I stuck my left arm out, ready to ward off
Juan if he came after me. I powered ahead.
Sneakers squeaked on the polished wood floor of the gym. One of the guys on my team yelled,
"Go, Jake!"
Juan saw my move and came after me. But I was just a little too fast. Thonk! Thonk! Thonk!
Stop. Pivot my back to Juan. Lock on to the basket, focus, focus . . .
I jumped and arced the ball toward the hoop.
It hit the backboard. It hit the rim. It bounced away. No score.
I fell back against Juan and Terry - the three of us ended up in a tangle on the gym floor, arms
and legs everywhere. The ball rolled out of bounds.
"No wonder you never made the team," Terry said, laughing as he helped pull me to my feet.
I had tried out for the team, but I didn't make the cut. At the time it had bothered me. Mostly
because Tom had been the big basketball hero when he was at our school. I wanted to live up to
that.
Now, I realized I didn't have time for after- school sports anyway. And playing during gym class
was enough basketball.
"Yeah? Well, I beat Juan with some of my excellent moves, and he is on the team," I said. I
reached back to help pull Juan up. "Although I can't figure out why they would want some guy
who looks like he's made out of straws."
"I'm just saving my best stuff for the finals," Juan said. "I don't want to waste my secret, killer
moves on you, Jake. And now you practically crushed my legs, you big ox. Man, you ought to be
playing football."
"Good idea." I grinned at Juan. He's about five-eleven and weighs like ten pounds. "Let me
practice my tackling on you."
Just then the coach whistled, which was the signal to hit the showers.
"Saved by the whistle, Juan," I said.
"You should have inherited some of Tom's moves," Terry said. "That brother of yours has a
jump shot."
38
"Man, Tom could have been in college ball easy. At a good school, too. If he would have stuck
with it," Juan chimed in. "That boy has the gift."
They were right. Tom did have the gift. But he had dropped out of basketball. The Yeerk who
controlled him had other plans, I guess.
I showered and got dressed for my next class. Marco was waiting out in the hallway. He had
gym next period.
"B-ball today?" he asked. "Cool. I thought it was going to be more wrestling. I hate wrestling.
Getting up close and personal with sweaty guys? Not my idea of a good time."
"The ancient Greeks used to wrestle with no clothes," I pointed out. "Just be glad this isn't
Greece."
"And no deodorant," Marco agreed. "It's going to be next Tuesday."
"What's going to be next Tuesday?"
Marco looked over my shoulder and then, very casually, around the hallway to make sure no one
was close enough to overhear. "The governor. That's when he's going in the hospital. I'll bet you
a hundred bucks it's for hemorrhoids." He grinned. "That's why it's kind of secret. No one is
supposed to know."
"So, how do you know?"
"Well, we know from the meeting the other night that he's going, right? So all I had to do is find
out what his schedule is going to be. Turns out it's no problem. I told them I was a reporter and
they faxed me a copy."
Marco pulled a folded piece of paper from his pocket and opened it for me to see.
"See? Saturday he gives a speech. Sunday he goes on a TV interview show. Monday he gives
another speech. Tuesday . . . oops! Suddenly on Tuesday he begins a five-day vacation, and they
don't say where he's going."
"Why would he keep it a secret, I wonder?"
"Oh, puh-leeze. If it is hemorrhoids? A politician getting his hemorrhoids operated on? The
jokes are just too easy. Letterman would be talking about it in his monologue."
I smiled. "Yeah, okay. Good work."
"Tomorrow's Saturday," Marco said. "Should we do it then?"
I guess the expression on my face showed how I felt. Marco cocked his head and looked
sideways at me. "You okay, man? You had a close call last night. I've been there, so I know it
isn't easy to just get past it."
39
"No, I'm cool," I said. I gave him a push. "Besides, since when are you all psyched to go?"
Marco had always been the most reluctant member of the group.
"You know since when," he said softly.
I nodded.
Marco was no longer reluctant to fight the Yeerks. It had become a very personal battle for him.
"Yeah, sorry," I said.
"As far as the others are concerned, I'm still the same old Marco," he said. "I don't want them
thinking anything is different. I don't want them feeling sorry for me."
"Now, Marco, how is anyone ever going to feel sorry for you? You're so totally obnoxious."
"And I plan to stay that way."
The bell rang, signaling the next class.
"Okay," I said. "Tomorrow. We'll need to think of some way to get inside that hospital, though.
They'll really be on the lookout."
"Actually, Cassie already suggested some thing to me," Marco said.
I rolled my eyes. "Oh, man. You know, I like Cassie. But this is the girl who suggested we try an
ant morph."
Marco started to head into the gym. I headed toward class.
"Not ants," he said over his shoulder.
"I don't even want to know."
"Think dog poop."
"What?" I demanded. But by then he was through the door and gone.
40
Chapter 10
Something nice, but for fifteen bucks or less," I said. "My dad's birthday is in two months, so I
have to spread my money pretty thin."
It was after school. We had headed to the mall. Me and Cassie and Rachel. My mom's birthday
was coming up. I had about fifteen dollars to buy her something, and the last time I'd bought her
a present it hadn't turned out all that well.
Who would ever guess that she wouldn't appreciate a classic Spiderman #3 in almost mint
condition?
Okay, so I was a year younger then. Plus, I had asked Marco to help me find something.
This time I asked Cassie if she would help me shop. Which was almost as dumb, since Cassie
isn't really into clothing and cute little stuff.
So Cassie had asked Rachel to help.
"How about that store?" I asked, pointing at one that had women's clothing.
"Yeah, right. Good choice, as long as you have at least a hundred dollars to spend," Rachel said.
"Okay. How about ..." Cassie began.
"Uh-uh. Cassie, think about it," Rachel said, looking slightly perturbed by our stupidity. "Look at
the name of the store. It might as well scream 'fat, middle-aged ladies.' Jake? Do you want to tell
your mom you think she's fat?"
"No." I shook my head vigorously. But then I thought it might be a trick question. "I mean, I
don't, do I?"
Rachel rolled her eyes. "No, you don't. Duh. Have you two ever shopped for anything? I feel like
I'm dealing with Ax here. I mean, are you two from this planet? We're looking for something on
sale. Something that says 'Mom, I still think of you as being young and cool.' Something classic,
understated. Most likely, we're talking a department store." She pointed. "That department store.
Second floor. Toward the front, on the right. That's where we want to be. Look for sale signs.
They'll be red with black letters."
Cassie grinned at me. "See? Rachel owns this mall."
"Shopping and kicking butt. Rachel's specialties," I said affectionately.
We cruised the department store and in about ten minutes, Rachel had found a silk blouse.
"It was thirty-three dollars originally," Rachel crowed. "Thirty-three, marked down to twentyfive.
Then, a thirty percent discount for this one- day sale. We got it for seventeen fifty! Do you
41
realize that's almost half off the original price? Seventeen and a half bucks! For that blouse! Yes!
She shops, she scores!"
"Yeah, but I was only going to spend fifteen," I said meekly.
"You didn't spend too much. Don't you know anything? You saved fifteen dollars and fifty cents.
You came out ahead by more than fifteen bucks!"
"Wait a minute. How did I save, if I spent?"
Cassie put her hand on my arm. "No. Don't ask. Rachel uses a whole twisted math involved in
shopping. Don't even try and understand it."
Rachel ignored Cassie's teasing. "Hey. While you pay, I have to go check something in Juniors.
Meet you at the food court."
Rachel peeled off, leaving me and Cassie alone in the racks of clothing.
"So when are you going to tell me your idea?" I asked.
"I thought Marco already told you."
I shook my head. "Nope. He just said 'think dog poop.' I did. I got a very bad feeling as a result."
Cassie looked a little pouty. "Look, it was the only animal I could think of that could get in and
out of a hospital without getting stepped on or poisoned. We wouldn't even be seen, probably. I
mean, they go everywhere. Who even notices them?"
"Cassie, so far I have done three insects. Flea, that was okay. Ant, that was definitely not okay.
And roach. I'm starting to feel jealous of Tobias. I mean, he's stuck as a hawk, but at least he
doesn't have to go around turning into bugs."
"Do you have a better idea, Jake? Because I respect your feelings. I was just trying to help. It's
just a suggestion."
I drew a deep breath. "No, I don't have any great suggestions. I'm just ... I mean . . . it's just,
whatever happened to the good old days when we would be tigers or wolves or something fun? I
don't want to be a fly. I saw that movie. The Fly. Both versions. The old one, and the new one
with Jeff Goldblum. I mean, a fly? A fly?"
"The movie. I forgot that movie," Cassie said.
She made a face. "The one where the guy has a tiny little human head stuck on a fly body and
he's trapped in a spiderweb and he's going 'h-e-e-e-l-p m-e-e-e' in this little tiny voice? And that
guy is so grossed out he just crushes him?"
We both just stood there, looking kind of sick.
42
"Moths?" Cassie suggested.
"Too slow," I said. "And too big. They would spot us."
"Okay ... um ... bees?"
"No way. No social insects ever again. Bees could be as bad as ants that way. No social in sects.
No hives. No colonies." I shuddered at the memory of the ant morph. It had been like dying. The
ant had no individual self. It was just a part of a bigger machine.
"Flies aren't social," Cassie said.
"Can I help you?" a saleswoman asked.
"No," Cassie said. "Thanks, anyway."
We started walking, heading to the food court to hook up with Rachel.
"It would just be to get into the hospital," I said, thinking out loud. "If they are using the hospital
to transfer Yeerks into hosts, it will mean they have some kind of a Yeerk pool in there. That's
what we are after. Find that Yeerk pool, wipe it out."
"So we would just be in fly morph for a brief time," Cassie said. "I mean, if we decided to do it.
We'd have to demorph to do any damage."
"And then, if we create enough confusion, we can escape in some other way. We wouldn't have
to do flies again."
"True," Cassie agreed. "We'd probably only be in the fly morph for a few minutes."
"Yep."
"So it's flies," Cassie said.
"Yep."
Then, both of us, at the same time, said "H-e-e-e-l-p m-e-e-e! H-e-e-e-l-p m-e-e-e!"
43
Chapter 11
Here's the thing about flies.
Being a fly is fun. It really is.
Turning into a fly ... that is a whole different story.
I guess it's no big secret that I kind of like Cassie. I think she's really pretty. But when I saw
these two huge, glittering, bulging, compound eyes come popping out of her eye sockets, I
screamed.
I mean, I screamed like a baby.
"Yaaaaahhh!"
"Great, Jake. That's going to make her feel good," Marco said.
"Marco, you have your eyes closed," I pointed out.
"And they're staying closed, too."
"Excuse me," Rachel said. She raced for the door of the barn and ran outside. A few seconds
later we heard the sound of barfing.
You have to understand. Cassie was mostly still human at the point where the fly eyes showed
up. She was about two feet tall and shrinking fast, and the extra legs had already popped out of
her chest, and the gauzy wings were growing from her back, but her face was still a human face.
Until the eyes popped out.
Oh, man. You think you've seen scary stuff? Maybe in movies or on TV? You haven't seen any
thing scary till you've seen fly eyes pop out of someone's head like a pair of balloons.
She was pretty small by the time her fly mouth appeared. I was grateful for that. Because later,
when I became a fly, I saw what a fly mouth looks like.
The eyes were bad. But if I'd seen that long, tubular, sucking, tonguelike thing come rolling out. .
. that thing that spits on the food, then sucks the spit mixture back in ...
Rachel came back inside. "Sorry," she said shakily. "Anyone have some gum? A Tic Tac?"
Ax was puzzled. Does the morphing process disturb you?
"Sometimes," I said, still fighting the urge to look away as Cassie shriveled down to a few
inches. "Some animals give me the willies."
The willies? What are the willies?
44
"Well, it's just this feeling of being grossed out. Sickened. Nauseated. Creeped. Like your skin is
crawling. Willies."
Is she done? Tobias asked. I'm not coming in there until she's done.
"Tell Tobias it's okay, will you, Ax?"
Tobias. Prince Jake says it's cool.
I smiled at Marco, who was now peeking through his fingers. Ax was learning to sound seminormal.
At least in thought-speak. When he was in human morph and spoke out loud, he still
played with every sound and drove everyone crazy.
Tobias flew in through the open hayloft above.
"Can you hear me, Cassie?" Rachel asked.
"Tobias. Do you see her?" Cassie was a true fly now.
Got her.
"Keep a sharp focus on her," I said. "Don't lose sight."
Relax. It's broad daylight, she's ten feet away. At this distance I can see the hairs on her little
fly legs. Unfortunately. Ooooh. Oh, man. Oh, that's just not even slightly attractive.
"Cassie?" Rachel asked again.
"Tobias? Try her with thought-speak."
Cassie? Cassie, can you hear me? There she goes! She's flying!
"Don't lose her, Tobias. Don't lose her."
"She won't go far," Marco said. "All the horse manure in this barn?
Where would she go that's any better for a fly?"
Suddenly, in my head I heard Yeeeeee haaaaahhhh!
"Cassie?"
Cassie?
Whooooo hoooooo!
"Cassie! Answer us!"
45
Cassie? You okay?
Oh, man! Man! Can this thing fly! You guys have got to try this. This thing flies like a rocket.
Yaaaah haaaahhh!
Are you able to control the fly brain?
Yes, yes. Don't worry, you guys. I'm fine. Sorry. But it's just such a complete, insane rush!
Come on, let's go, time's a-wasting.
I sucked in a deep breath. I had been hoping everything would be fine. That Cassie would not
have any problems. But at the same time, I was utterly disgusted at the idea of becoming a fly.
And now she was saying it was okay.
You'd think it would get easier, slipping in and out of strange shapes. But you'd be wrong. Gross
is gross, and always remains gross.
"Okay, guys. It looks like we're doing this," I said, trying desperately to sound cheerful and
optimistic.
"Oh, goody," Marco said.
Yes! Goody! Ax said, totally unaware that Marco was being sarcastic.
"Sounds like Cassie's having fun," Rachel said.
"Uh-huh," I said. "Let's just do it."
We did it.
Morphing was as gross as we'd expected.
But Cassie was also right. Once you were in the morph; once you got used to the fact that your
vision was like a thousand tiny TV screens, each showing a slightly different picture; once you
got done freaking about the way your nasty fly tongue stuck out; once you got past the bizarre
combination of hooks and bristles and hairs that made up your fly leg; once you got past the fact
that nothing looks right or familiar when you're only about an eighth of an inch long; and mostly,
once you stopped thinking about that stupid fly movie . . .
Well, then, it was cool!
I have flown before. As a peregrine falcon and as a seagull.
Both are cool. I mean, the falcon can go like 175 miles an hour in a dive.
Faster than a stock car. Faster than small planes.
But flying as a fly is totally, completely insane.
46
A housefly beats its wings 200 times per second.
Say "hello, there" out loud. In the time it took you to say that, a fly's wings beat 200 times.
A fly moves at about four miles per hour. Which doesn't sound very fast, compared to a falcon
hitting almost 200 miles per hour. But trust me, when you're only an eighth of an inch long, four
miles an hour is like warp factor nine.
And what's really cool is you can do that going down, going left, right, or straight up.
And you can change directions in no time. One minute you're shooting straight ahead like a
bullet, the next tenth of a second you're going straight up.
Cassie was right. It was gross, but it was fun.
Yeeeee haaaaahhh! Ax yelled.
Whoooaaaa hooaaahhh! I cried as I blasted straight up at what felt like the speed of light.
We are ugly as sin, but we are so cool! Rachel exulted.
Let's go find some dog poop! Marco said. Kidding, he added a second later. Just
kidding.
Okay, okay, we have important stuff to do, I said after we had all spent a couple of minutes
getting used to the fly's simple instincts and pretty decent senses. Time to get on the bus.
Tobias was the bus. The hospital was a couple of miles away. Flies are fast in relative terms, but
in actual speed, Tobias was a lot quicker. It would have taken us hours. Tobias could carry us
there in a few minutes.
Hop on the big feathery guy, Cassie said. Aim for the back of his neck. We don't want his
wings or tail knocking us off.
It's just a good thing I know you guys, Tobias said. My own little necklace of houseflies. It's
enough to gag a maggot.
Gag a maggot? Marco echoed, Gag a maggot? Hey pal, don't be dissing our kids that way.
Yuck, Tobias commented. And then we were off.
47
Chapter 12
I clung to Tobias's feathers. It was easy enough to do. Fly legs can grab onto glass, or hang
upside down on a ceiling.
I could feel the wind whipping around me. It rattled my wings and actually whistled through the
chinks and joints of my tiny exoskeleton.
An incredible array of aromas assaulted my sensitive antennae. Unfortunately, the main things
my fly brain seemed interested in were anything sweet, anything rotting, or anything decayed
and putrid.
This is a little like that shrew morph I did early on, Rachel pointed out. The same interest in
dead meat.
Suddenly, a monster! It loomed huge in my compound eyes. Smaller than me, but still way, way
too big.
What the . . . ! I yelped.
What? What is it? Cassie asked.
Oh, man. I think it's a flea. It looks about the size of a poodle. But not even slightly cute.
Wait a minute! Tobias cried. Are you telling me I have fleas?
Just one that I've seen, I answered. Now he's gone. He probably jumped off.
Actually, I was lying. The flea was working his way along Tobias skin, beneath the feathers,
looking for a good place to sink his penetrating, bloodthirsty tongue.
But somehow I didn't think Tobias would want to hear that.
Okay, we're at the hospital, Tobias said. I'll take a low pass, then tell you guys when to jump
off. Kind of like an old war movie. You guys are the paratroopers.
Good example, Marco said. Ever notice how in those old movies the paratroopers mostly get
shot?
Jake? Cassie whispered to me in thought-speak so that no one else could hear.
Yeah?
You could still drop out of this mission, she said. Everyone would understand.
Thanks. But no. Tom or no Tom, the Yeerks have to be stopped. That's what I told myself,
anyway. I guess it was true.
48
Okay, everything looks fine to me, Tobias said. I see an open window on the third floor. No
screen.
You're sure? Marco asked.
Marco, in light this bright I could tell you if there was a single strand of spiderweb across that
window, let alone a screen.
He said spiderweb, Rachel moaned.
H-e-e-e-l-p m-e-e-e! Marco mimicked.
By absolutely terrible luck, the old version of The Fly had been on TV the night before. Like
fools, we'd all watched it.
I don't understand what this means, Ax grumbled.
Get ready, Tobias said. Three . . . two . . . one . . . bail!
I leapt from his back. I opened my wings. The slipstream was so fast it sent me tumbling, end
over end through the air. But as my speed dropped I quickly gained control.
Everyone okay?
Yee hah! Rachel said.
I see the window opening, Ax said.
I saw him fly past me like a buzzing, wobbling, careening jet fighter. At least I think it was him.
I fell in behind, following his wake.
It turned out Ax was wrong. What he'd thought was a window was actually a small sign on the
side of the building. With fly eyes you had to get pretty close to see anything. So we blazed
along the face of the building for a while, trying to spot it.
Keep going, Tobias called to us. You're almost there.
Suddenly, I could feel a rush of cooler air, billowing out at us.
Here we go, I said.
I turned into the current of air and seconds later was in the relative darkness inside the building.
Okay. We're looking for anything that might be a miniature Yeerk pool, I reminded everyone.
Everyone except Ax has been near a Yeerk pool, so try to remember that smell, and see if your
antennae pick up anything similar.
49
I'll tell you one thing. I'll bet I know where the maternity ward is. I smell large numbers of dirty
diapers, Rachel said.
Okay, let's split up, like we planned. Ax and Cassie, you're with me. Rachel and Marco, be
careful.
Rachel and Marco peeled off and soon disappeared from sight.
The three of us flew out into what we figured was a hallway, since it seemed very long and had
bright lights all along it.
I smell poop. I smell a banana. At least, I think it's a banana. And, I smell more poop, Cassie
said. Say one thing for flies. If you ever need to find poop, hire a fly.
Below us, barely visible, we occasionally caught sight of big, moving oval shapes - the tops of
people's heads. But with our limited sight, they seemed like floating islands of hair moving on a
blurry sea.
How's our time, Ax? I asked.
We have used twenty percent of our time, Ax reported.
Good. That's right on plan, I said, trying to reassure myself as much as the two of them.
Yaaaahhh!
What is it?
That human tried to reach up and hit me! Ax said. But he was very slow.
Hey, Cassie said. Hey. Do you guys smell that?
More poop?
No. Similar to poop, but different. A strange smell. My fly brain doesn't know what it is. I'm
trying to remember . . .
I too am smelling something, Ax reported. But not very strong.
I'm thinking we turn right, Cassie suggested.
Right turn, I agreed. Now I was getting the scent, too. A dark, deep, rich aroma. Sweet and
oily.
Marco, Rachel, I called to them in thought-speak. You guys have anything?
Barely hear - : - must --- away. Nothing --- 
50
We are at the limits of the thought-speak range, Ax said.
Now the scent was more powerful than be fore.
In there, I said. I think that's a door.
We landed. My six legs, each armed with sharp talons and sticky pads, gripped the smooth
surface of the door.
Here's a question, Cassie said. How do you open a door when you're like an eighth of an
inch long?
Down to the floor. We can walk or fly under the crack.
Seconds later, we were on the linoleum, marching jerkily forward. We passed beneath the door,
then instantly took flight again.
Oh, man, there is definitely something in here, Cassie said. Over there. Do you see a big,
shiny-looking superdome kind of thing?
Yeah. I agree. I think that may be it. Does anyone see anyone in the room? Any humans?
No one did.
Okay, Ax. You demorph first. If someone barges in, your Andalite body will be more useful
than the two of us as humans.
Yes, Prince Jake.
Ax? You really, really don't have to call me that.
Yes, Prince Jake. I am beginning the change.
Cool. Cassie and I will hang out on the ceiling.
A few moments later I saw a vast eyeball, stuck on the end of a long stalk, come shooting up
toward us where we hung upside down. One of Ax's extra, stalk-mounted eyes. The eye turned to
look at us.
Then, a violent vibration in the air. The eye disappeared from sight.
And a second vibration, like something heavy falling.
Ax? Are you okay?
Yes. There was a human here. But he is un conscious now.
51
Chapter 13
We demorphed as quickly as we could. When my human eyesight returned, I saw Ax, standing
calmly in his Andalite form. Against the far wall was a man in a white coat, holding a clip board.
He was crumpled and unconscious, but alive.
Knowing your brother is a Controller, I did not kill this creature, Ax said. I feared it might
be him.
"No. It's not. But that's a good instinct, Ax. Whoever this guy is, he's someone's brother or son or
even father."
I took a look first at my own body. I was barefoot, like I always was when I came out of a
morph. And wearing only my silly-looking bike shorts and tight T-shirt. (Even Ax can't figure
out how to morph anything more than the most minima! clothing.) But I seemed to have all my
usual legs and arms.
"You okay, Cassie?" I asked.
"I'm fine." She pointed at what had looked like a shiny superdome to us as flies. It was a
stainless steel vat about eight feet across.
I laughed. "You know what this is? This is a whirlpool. A Jacuzzi. Someone just put a lid over it.
Why would they have this in a hospital?"
"For therapy," Cassie said. "You know, for people with muscle strains or back problems."
I stepped to the side of the whirlpool. I grabbed the handles on the lid and lifted. It opened easily
on hydraulic hinges. I looked inside. I recoiled.
The water was sludgy, brown, and viscous.
And roiling with slugs.
Yeerks. In their natural state.
"Well, well, well," I said.
Yeerks, Ax said, with that combination of disgust and pure hatred Andalites always showed.
A portable Yeerk pool. There must be a small Kandrona nearby.
Yeerks must leave their host bodies every three days to return to a Yeerk pool. In the Yeerk pool
they feed by soaking up various nutrients, but especially Kandrona rays, which are like the rays
of their home sun. Kandronas are artificial sources of Kandrona rays.
"Can they see us? Now, I mean?"
52
No, Prince Jake. In their natural state they are blind.
I walked slowly around the whirlpool. My foot hit something solid. The pump for the whirlpool
action. It was disconnected, with a wire pulled out of the wall socket. The control panel had been
ripped away, exposing bare wires.
"Ax? What do you think would happen to all those Yeerks in there if the temperature of the
liquid suddenly went up to say, one hundred twenty degrees? And the liquid was all agitated?"
Ax looked puzzled. I believe the heat and the agitation might destroy them.
"Well. That would be a pity." I made a quick decision. "Ax? Watch the door to the hallway.
Cassie? We may need you in some more dangerous morph. What have you got?"
"Wolf?"
"Perfect. But no howling."
"What are you going to do?" Cassie asked.
"We came here to stop this sick operation, right? Well, wiping out a hundred or so Yeerks might
be a good way to start. I'm going to hook this thing back together, and Jacuzzi these filthy creeps
to death."
There were no tools in the room. But I did find some tape and a pair of tweezers. That was all I
needed. I began reconnecting wires, red to red, blue to blue, green to green. Without the
switches, the settings would all automatically be at maximum. Maximum heat, maximum jets.
But all the while, in the back of my head, was this nagging feeling.
It couldn't be this easy.
I connected the last wire.
Cassie had finished the transformation into her wolf body. She stood by patiently, like a very
big, very tough-looking dog.
"Okay. Time to boil some Yeerks."
I reached down and stuck the plug in the outlet.
It took a few seconds, then the boiling sound began. The familiar Jacuzzi bubbling.
The door opened. A man and a woman, both wearing white lab coats. For a split second they just
froze and stared.
"Andalite!" the woman yelped.
53
Cassie was on her in a flash. She leapt, hit the woman hard, and knocked her to the floor.
Ax moved toward the man, but the man was fast. He dodged, staying out of range of Ax's tail.
I was still behind the whirlpool, out of sight. I was trying to focus on morphing into tiger form
for a fight.
But then, two more men, dressed in uniform as guards, came plowing into the room. The first
one leveled a gun.
"Ax!" I shouted. "A gun!"
Ax's tail flashed.
"Aaaargghh!" the Controller screamed.
The hand that had been holding the gun was no longer attached to the man's arm.
"Get backup to the pool area! Andalites!" the second guard screamed into a walkie-talkie. Then
he drew his gun.
BLAM! BLAM!
They told me later there was a third shot. But I didn't hear it.
A sledgehammer blow struck the side of my head. A ricochet. For a brief second I clung to
consciousness. But then, I swooned. I fell.
Facedown in the whirlpool.
Facedown in the bubbling, boiling mass of dying Yeerks.
54
Chapter 14
"Facedown, unconscious, in the superheating Yeerk pool.
I don't know for how long.
When I woke I had two terrifying, overwhelming feelings. One was suffocation. I had breathed
in a lungful of the liquid from the pool.
I came to, gasping and hacking and gagging. I was alive, but I could hardly breathe. Each breath
was a struggle. I coughed and I think at one point I threw up.
The second feeling was of pain in my head. Pain like nothing I had ever even imagined be fore.
It was like someone was drilling a hole in my ear, drilling straight into my brain.
I wanted to scream, but I was still choking. I was on my knees on the floor of the hospital room,
wanting to cry from the pain and gasping for every half-breath of air.
All the while, a battle raged. They were trying to get in the doorway. But it was too narrow for
more than one or two human-Controllers at a time to attack. Ax's tail and Cassie's long wolf teeth
were enough to hold them off.
BLAM! Another gunshot!
"Stop firing, you fool!" someone shouted. "The pool is in there! Visser Three will eat your guts!"
Even in my condition I could see that Ax and Cassie couldn't last. I needed to morph, to join the
battle. But I could not seem to do it. The pain ... or maybe the lack of oxygen ... I couldn't
concentrate. My brain was fuzzy, drift ing ...
I heard a rumbling, pounding noise from the hallway outside. There were cries and screams of
rage. Suddenly, into the room burst a huge black gorilla and a second wolf.
Marco and Rachel.
They had driven the attackers away, but only for a few seconds.
Jake's hurt, I heard Cassie say. He fell in the Yeerk pool.
Marco, grab Jake, Rachel ordered. Get something to cover his face. Ax, Cassie, keep holding
the door. I'm going to change morph. We need more firepower.
I felt myself lifted up off the floor. A white cloth was wrapped around my head. One of the lab
coats from an injured Controller, I guessed. I was cradled in the huge arms of a gorilla.
Rock-a-bye baby, Marco joked. Hang in there, man. We're getting you out of here.
55
I was still coughing and gasping, but my breathing was at least improving. Not enough to speak,
but I could breathe enough to keep from passing out.
At the same time, something had happened to the pain in my head. It was diminishing. And yet,
instead of feeling more clearheaded, I felt more confused.
"Get them!" a Controller was yelling outside the door. "Attack. Attack!"
It doesn't look like I'm gonna fit through this doorway. It was Rachel. So I guess I'll have to
make the door a little bigger.
I caught just a glimpse through the fabric that hid my face. A flash of something huge and gray.
Rachel's elephant morph.
Rachel? a voice in my head wondered. The voice was surprised. A human?
BOOOM! WHUMP! CRRRUUUUNNCH!
Now the door is plenty big, Rachel said.
Wild screams! Panic! Cries of pain!
I was bounced and slammed against walls and even dropped at one point. I felt us go down a set
of stairs. I felt hands grabbing at me and slipping away.
Finally, fresh air. We were running like mad for the shelter of a stand of trees that fronted the
hospital.
Cassie! Marco said. You have a horse morph, right? Quick. Before they figure out how to
follow us.
I was tossed onto the dirt.
The gorilla peeled back the coat that was over my face. You alive? Man! That was intense.
That is one hospital that's going to need some redecorating. We're gonna put you on Cassie. Then
we'll try to cover your retreat.
"My . . . head ..." I said.
Headache? No surprise, dude.
"Something . . . wrong ... I can't. . . think."
Don't worry. Take a break. We have it under control. More or less.
Unbelievable, said a voice in my head. Can it be? Humans?
56
What was that voice? Where was it coming from?
Marco lifted me and slung me over a horse's back. Cassie.
Cassie? A human, yes. And Rachel? The cousin? Human as well.
My hand tried to pull the coat away from my face.
What was happening? There was a voice in side my head.
We were running now, running and running at full gallop, through trees, across lawns, down
suburban streets where Cassie's hooves clattered loudly.
We jumped a fence. I flew through the air and landed hard on the dirt.
I felt pain, but it came from far away.
The coat was loose. I looked around. Trees, everywhere. A panting horse standing nearby.
I saw all this, but in a distant way, as if I were watching it all on TV. My eyes moved left, right.
They moved all on their own. Like someone else was focusing them.
Cassie. I tried to say her name. Cassie.
But no sound came from my mouth.
Don't struggle, Jake, a voice in my head said. It's pointless.
What? Who was saying that? What was . . . ?
Then, a laugh only I could hear. Put that primitive human brain to work, Jake. Jake, the
Animorph, it sneered. Jake, the servant of the Andalite filth!
Then I knew.
I knew what the voice was.
A Yeerk!
A Yeerk in my own head.
I was a Controller.
57
Chapter 15
Very good. You figured it out, said the silent voice in my head, mocking me.
NO! NO! NO!
Jake, are you all right? Cassie asked. For a moment I thought she had heard me cry out. But
no, she was just concerned.
Tobias landed on a branch overhead. Is he okay?
I can't tell. He's alive. He's breathing. But it's like he's zoned out or something. We may have to
take him to a doctor.
I wanted to tell them both. To scream "They have me! They are inside me!" But I couldn't make
my mouth move. It was like there was a roadblock. Like I could form the thoughts, give the
order to my lips and tongue to speak, but the order never got there.
Struggle all you like, human. Fight me! the Yeerk gloated. Go ahead. It won't matter, in the
end. I am in your head. I am wrapped around your brain like a living blanket.
NO!
I can read your thoughts. I control your body. I am tapped into your memory. I can read it like a
book.
Get out of my head! No! No!
Oh, I don't think I want to do that, Jake. Why would I abandon such an interesting host? So you
are the one who has driven Visser Three half-mad with rage. A kid. The midget.
Midget? How do - 
You're surprised I know what Tom calls you? Ha ha ha. Oh, the irony really is sweet. Don't you
get it, clever Jake? Don't you see what's happened, my little Animorph.
Cassie had become human again. She knelt down beside me and looked down into my eyes.
"He's alert. His eyes are tracking. Jake? Jake, can you talk to me?"
It was a nightmare. That's what it was. Another nightmare. I would wake up soon. I would wake
up and laugh and laugh.
I am Temrash one-one-four, the Yeerk said proudly. Formerly Temrash two-five-two, of the
Sulp Niar pool. I have been promoted. No doubt you are happy for me.
You filthy slug! Get out of my head!
Do you know what my last host was? Who it was? the Yeerk taunted.
58
Shut up! Shut up! Stop talking to me! Go away. It wasn't real. It couldn't be real!
It was Tom, of course. Your brother. I am the Yeerk who controlled your brother.
That cut through my growing hysteria. What?
Ah, I thought that might interest you. Yes, Tom was my host.
Then . . . he's . . .
Free? Ha ha ha. The Yeerk laughed in my head. You're even stupider than your brother. No,
your brother's body has been given to a new Yeerk. Someone with a lower rank. I am too
important now to be wasted on Tom. I am to take on a new and important project. A very special
host.
The governor!
Jake, Tobias tried thought-speaking to me. lf you can hear me, move your hand.
Well, well. Not a complete idiot, are you? the Yeerk said. Yes. I was to be given the most
important post on this planet. But this is better still. Visser Three is very determined to catch you
and your friends. He will be surprised to learn that you are human.
I'll never tell you who the - 
The others? You mean, Cassie, Marco, Rachel? Tobias, who's sitting in the tree over our heads?
And of course the one remaining Andalite, Aximili Esgarrouth Isthill?
"We have to get him to a doctor," Cassie told Tobias.
Just then, Marco arrived. He was fully human again. He was dressed in his morph clothes and
walking gingerly without shoes. "Doctor? He needs a doctor? What's the matter with him?"
"Nothing is the matter with me," I said, quite suddenly. "I'm fine."
Only I didn't say it. My mouth spoke the words. But I didn't say it.
The Yeerk had spoken through my mouth.
"No way," Cassie said. "We're taking you to a doctor. You didn't answer me for like five min
utes. Maybe you have a concussion."
My body sat up. "Sorry I scared you, Cassie. But I'm fine. And where are you going to take me?
Back to that hospital? What if some doctor does a blood test and he sees something that shows
him I'm an Animorph?"
"Like what?" Marco asked, sounding skeptical.
59
"How do I know? Maybe some leftover roach DNA. Look, I'm fine, okay?"
I'm going back up, Tobias said. Make sure no one is after us, and see if Rachel and Ax are
okay. He flapped his wings and flew away through the trees.
"As soon as we know Rachel and Ax are safe, we need to break up and go our separate ways,"
my mouth said.
The Yeerk was considering his next move. I could not "hear" his thoughts. But I could feel him
using my brain. He was digging through my memory. Trying to learn quickly about the others.
He was using my brain. Using me.
I had to do something quick. Something to warn Cassie and Marco. Surely they would guess
what was happening. They were the two people in the whole world who were closest to me.
Surely they would realize that I was no longer myself.
Wouldn't they?
"I don't think there's all that much the Yeerks can do right now," Marco said to Cassie. "We're
deep in the national forest. It would take a while for them to organize a search. They'd need
helicopters and lots of human-Controllers. And they don't even know what they're looking for."
He laughed. "After all, they still think we're Andalites."
"Yeah, but it means we're going to have to be very careful with Ax," my mouth said. "We'll need
to hide him. I think we may have parboiled quite a few Yeerks in that whirlpool. They're going
to be very upset."
It was incredible. It was shocking to listen to. The Yeerk was using my voice. My inflection. He
was saying the words I would have said.
Marco and Cassie would never guess. As far as they could see or hear, the Yeerk in my brain
was me.
Yes, little human, the Yeerk sneered silently. Your body is my home now. Mine. Body and
mind, under my control. Forget resistance. It is futile. No host has ever overpowered a Yeerk. It
is impossible.
I felt a dark wave of terror wash over me. He was telling the truth. I knew he was. No host had
ever defeated a Yeerk.
Resistance was futile.
Futile.
60
I would never be free. Just like Tom. If this Yeerk moved on, they would give me to another. I
was a slave.
Forever.
There was a noise behind me. Footsteps on the pine needles and leaves. At the same time, Tobias
came swooping down to land on a nearby branch.
I turned around. Rachel.
"Hey, cousin," I said. "I see you made it okay."
Then, a touch on my shoulder.
I spun suddenly. I hadn't heard anyone else arriving.
Ax! Just behind me. His Andalite face close to mine. His big eyes watching me.
And in that split second, hatred revealed itself. A hatred that had crossed light years of space to
play itself out on planet Earth.
Andalite! the Yeerk hissed silently. And in that one word I heard the same fury and contempt
I heard whenever Ax said the word "Yeerk."
Only I heard it. The Yeerk did not say a thing.
But surprised, unaware, unprepared, he did curl my lip in an instinctive expression of revulsion.
It was a small thing. It lasted only a second. And then the Yeerk was using my mouth to say,
"Hey, Ax. You did great back there when - "
In a movement too fast for me to see, Ax whipped his tail forward. In the blink of an eye, his
scythe blade was leveled a quarter-inch from my throat.
Yeerk! he said.
61
Chapter 16
"Ax! What are you doing?" Cassie demanded.
"Are you NUTS?" Marco cried.
"What's your problem, Ax?" my voice asked the Andalite.
But he did not waver. And he did not pull that deadly tail away from my throat. Prince Jake has
been taken. He is a Controller.
"What?" Rachel snapped. "Back off, Ax. You're crazy."
His head was in the Yeerk pool long enough for a Yeerk to enter his head, Ax said. And just
now . . . you all saw his expression when he was surprised to see me. I am not human. I do not
know every human expression. So tell me. What was that look?
"This is crazy." The Yeerk tried a disbelieving laugh. "Marco . . . Cassie . . . would you please
tell this nut that I am okay?"
But I saw doubt in Marco's shrewd eyes. "Yeah, I'm sure you're fine, Jake. But Cassie? Didn't
you say Jake seemed zoned out? Like he wouldn't answer for a few minutes, even though he was
awake?"
Cassie nodded her head. She, too, was looking suspicious. "Yeah. He seemed normal and all, but
he wouldn't answer me." She shrugged. "Sorry, Jake, but you did act funny."
It takes a while for the Yeerk to take full control of the host brain, Ax said. During that time
the host will be passive. He may even seem to be in a coma.
I swear, I could have kissed the Andalite right then. I wanted to yell "Yes! Yes!"
"You guys can't possibly believe this," my mouth said. "I mean, okay, we have to be careful. But
it's me. It's me, Jake, all right?"
"Being Jake and all, you'll understand if we take a minute to think this through," Rachel said.
"Ax? How are we supposed to know one way or the other?"
Tobias answered for him. The Yeerk needs to return to the Yeerk pool and absorb Kandrona
rays every three days. If we hold him for three days, we'll know.
Now I felt just the slightest edge of fear from the Yeerk. He was measuring the odds. Trying to
decide what to do. But with Ax's tail blade at my throat, the Yeerk kept my body very still.
"We can't hold him for three days," Cassie argued. "His family would go ballistic. They'll call
the cops. Chapman will realize he's not in school. The bad guys will put two and two together."
"Look. Hello. Hello-o-o? It's me, Jake. Remember? I am not a Controller."
62
Marco shook his head. "If he is ... if there's a Yeerk in his head, then he knows all our secrets. If
he gets in touch with any other Yeerk, we are all dead. We can't take the chance. Maybe Ax is
right. Maybe not.
But we can't guess wrong."
I agree, Tobias said. lf he's still Jake, he'll understand. If he's a Controller, well, I guess we'll
find out, won't we?
"Rachel?" Marco asked.
Rachel met my gaze. "Sorry, Jake. But we have to play it safe. You know that."
"Look," I argued. "It's like Cassie said. My folks will go nuts. They'll call the police. They'll go
on TV asking if anyone has seen me. They'll be putting up posters all over town. I mean, no
offense, Tobias, but I have an actual family, not some messed-up aunts and uncles who didn't
want to be taking care of me in the first place. People will notice if I disappear." I turned to
Cassie. "Cassie, come on. Explain it to them."
Come on, Cassie, I thought. Come on, be hard for once. Don't feel for me. Don't be sweet, just
this once.
"There is a way," Cassie said hesitantly.
"To be sure whether he's a Controller?" Rachel asked.
"No," Cassie said. Her voice grew stronger. "A way to keep his family and the school from
knowing he's gone. Ax could do it. Ax could morph into Jake."
Cassie. The amazing Cassie. She had hit on the one possible solution. I wished so badly I could
tell her right then what an amazingly smart, incredibly cool person she was.
The Yeerk in my head was not happy.
What's the matter, Temrash one-one-four of the Sulp Niar pool? I asked. Not feeling quite so
cocky anymore?
Ax reached one of his delicate, many-fingered hands toward my face. He pressed his fingers
against my forehead.
I will acquire your DNA now Prince Jake, he said.
The Yeerk could not stand it anymore. The Andalite's touch made him so furious it was like a
physical illness.
"Get your hand off me, Andalite filth!" he screamed aloud in a distorted version of my voice.
63
But Ax's tail was still within an inch of my jugular. And the Yeerk knew very well how deadly
fast that tail was. He did not move.
The others all stared, wide-eyed.
"Well," Rachel said. "At least now we're sure."
"No, you're wrong," my voice pleaded. "He's just making me mad. Hey, it's been a stressful
morning, all right? Give me a break."
'Andalite filth'? Tobias repeated the Yeerk's words. We're supposed to believe Jake would
say that? Jake? Because he was stressed out? Nah. Not in this universe.
"Jake," Cassie said, looking into my eyes. "I know you're still in there. I know you're probably
afraid. But we will get that thing out of your head, Jake. We will."
Okay ," Marco said. "We need a place to keep him."
"We can't use anyone's home," Cassie said, thinking aloud. "We can't use my barn. My dad is in
and out of there constantly."
I know a place, Tobias said. It's not far from here. An old shack back in the woods.
"We can tie him up," Rachel said. "But we'll still have to have at least one of us there all the
time, to make sure he doesn't get away."
I cannot help very much, Ax said. l will be pretending to be Jake.
"Okay," Marco said, "then the rest of us, Cassie, Rachel, and I, will rotate shifts, along with
Tobias. Tobias can stay the whole time, except when he has to go hunting."
"Okay, let's go," Rachel said. "Come on, Jake. Get up. We're out of here."
Cassie came over and gave me her hand. She helped pull me to my feet.
It was an odd moment, because I could feel Cassie's touch. And yet I had no power to squeeze
her hand, or give her any assurance.
The Yeerk did that for me. He deliberately held her hand an extra few seconds.
She cares for you, the Yeerk said. She is their weak link. Rachel will be strong. So will the
hawk and the Andalite. But Marco ... he thinks too much. And he has an interesting history. He
is open to persuasion.
I felt sick. The Yeerk was opening my mind at will. Reading whatever he wanted. I had no
secrets from him. None. He already knew everything I knew about my friends. If he got away . . .
My feet began walking. Tobias led the way, appearing and disappearing in the trees above.
64
Rachel walked ahead of me. Behind me, Marco and Ax. Cassie stayed at my side.
"From all we know, Jake, you can still hear me and understand me," Cassie said. "I know you
can't answer. Or if you do answer it won't be you, anyway - "
"But it is me," said the Yeerk. "Who else would it be?"
"The Yeerk," Cassie said calmly.
"You think I'm a Controller just because I yelled at Ax? Like I've never lost my temper be fore?
Come on. It was a bad day. For all of us, but especially for me."
Not so bad a day, Ax piped up from behind. How many Yeerks were in that pool? How
many survived those temperatures? Only you, by getting inside Prince Jake. How many of your
pool-fellows died today?
I could feel the Yeerk boiling with rage. It was shocking and bizarre to feel so much emotion. It
was something he could not hide from me. I could feel his emotions, even though I could not
penetrate his thoughts.
"Ax," the Yeerk said, "I'm never happy when any creature has to be destroyed. But I don't feel
any pity for those Yeerks. They are out to enslave us. We did what we had to do."
It was perfect. Exactly what I would have said. Because it was exactly what I felt.
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Cassie looking at me with a puzzled expression.
See? Already she has doubts, the Yeerk said to me. She is bothered by the Andalite's
bloodthirstiness. She liked what I said more.
Was he right? Would all of my friends stand firm? How could they, when every word I spoke
sounded exactly like me?
We marched through the woods for what seemed like a very long time. None of us could move
very fast because we were without shoes. Tobias knew these woods well and led us around
brambles and rough patches, but still, my feet were tender after an hour of walking on pine
needles and twigs.
But the pain was so far away. ... I was feel ing it from a distance. It was like I was shackled.
Chained to a wall. I could not move a hand, or even a finger. I did not blink my own eyes. I did
not decide which direction to look, or what sounds to focus on.
The Yeerk's control was absolute.
Almost there, Tobias said. I'm going higher to make sure the area is completely clear.
65
All this walking. Such a waste of effort, the Yeerk commented to me. They cannot possibly
hold me against my will. Not even for three hours, let alone three days.
"You heard Tobias, right, Jake?" Cassie asked. "Almost there. It's a good thing. My feet are
killing me. I need to walk barefoot more often. Like I did when I was little. Toughen up, for
times like these. Getting home will be easier. I can just use my osprey morph and fly home."
"Cassie, listen," the Yeerk said. "I know you guys think you're doing the right thing. But there's
no way Ax can pull off being me. My parents will figure it out. Or worse yet, Tom will figure it
out. Then we'll all be dead. Don't you see what's happening here?"
"Shut up, Yeerk," Rachel snapped. "I've known Jake all my life. Marco has known him since
they were kids. And Cassie has known him for years. Between the three of us, we can teach Ax
to pass for Jake."
"It will never work," the Yeerk said.
Rachel stopped walking. She turned to face me, blocking the way. She was smirking, but she
seemed to be looking past me, over my shoulder. "No? You don't think so, Yeerk?"
The Yeerk stopped walking. "Rachel, you don't have to try and impress me with how tough you
are. I know you're too smart to really believe any of this. And you know as well as I do, this is
not going to work."
"I disagree," a voice behind me said. "Humans believe what they see."
The Yeerk whipped my head around.
There, standing a few feet from me was . , . me.
Totally, absolutely, me.
66
Chapter 17
Tie was a perfect copy of me. Like looking in a mirror.
"I morphed a while back," Ax said. "I've been watching the way you walk and move. To copy
you better. Ter. Bet. Ter."
The Yeerk grinned. "You may look like me, but that isn't going to be enough. I give it an hour
before Tom figures it out."
Marco looked at Rachel and cocked an eyebrow. Rachel looked at Cassie, who sighed and
nodded her head.
"See, that was a stupid way to play it, Yeerk," Marco said. "If you really were Jake, you might be
frustrated that we wrongly suspected you. But you'd figure the smart thing would be to help Ax
play the role. If you were you, so to speak, you'd have to hope Ax pulled it off."
Rachel curled her lip contemptuously. "You just blew final Jeopardy. You're still trying to make
us let you go. By now Jake would have realized he had to help us succeed."
The Yeerk said nothing. I think he knew he'd made an error. But I still sensed absolute
confidence from him. Like a poker player holding an extra ace.
We reached the shack. It was a depressing, half-fallen-down mess with a wood floor and log
walls and a roof that only covered half the place.
There was a bird's nest of some type in the rafters. Bushes had grown in through a hole in one
wall. There were beer cans and soda cans strewn around, but they all looked pretty old. Nothing
recent.
Tobias had chosen well. We would probably be left alone for the three days.
Tobias, with his laser vision, had found a few feet of rope in an old campground. He flew back
with it in his talons and Marco and Rachel tied my hands behind my back.
"Sorry, Jake," Marco said. "But that's the way it is. If you're still in there, you understand."
"We'll loosen the rope every couple of hours so the circulation isn't cut off," Rachel said. "I'll be
here for the first shift. Cassie and Marco are going back with Ax, to get him prepared to play
you." She smiled. "He already has the serious, responsible-sounding thing down. They just need
to give him a sense of humor and stop him from playing with every sound he says."
It sounded fairly good to me. But I was nervous that only two of them would be around to guard
me.
Of course, one of those two was Tobias. I could never run fast enough to hide from him. And
Rachel could morph into a wolf and run me down.
67
But it bothered me that the Yeerk in my head had not lost his cockiness.
In fact, he was reveling in a fantasy of promotions and power. Within a few hours I will be
back with my kind. I will personally tell Visser Three all I know. It will be the end of your little
band. The end! Visser Three will promote me again. It will be the fastest series of promotions
ever. I'm already in the one-hundreds. I could rise to the nineties. I will be an Under-Visser. In a
few of your years, who knows? I could be a Visser!
But it was more than just talk. I could see the pictures, too. The images his mind conjured up.
They were sketchy, but I saw Visser Three nodding his head as my Yeerk, still in my body,
showed him my friends. They were all bound and gagged and lying helpless on the floor of
Visser Three's Blade ship.
Why was I seeing this? The Yeerk was able to shield his other thoughts. Was this fantasy too
emotional for him to hide from me? Or was he actually showing off for my benefit?
Do you have these fantasies a lot? I said, as cruelly as I could.
You want to laugh at my fantasies? Shall I delve into a few of yours? Let's see what's hidden
deep in your brain, human.
And then, to my horror, I was no longer in the cabin. It was a bright, huge gymnasium. But not
exactly a gym. A sports arena. Yes. With thousands and thousands of fans.
I felt like crawling away. I knew this fantasy. It was kind of lame, I guess. But I could not
escape. The Yeerk could play my fantasies as easily as sticking a cassette into a VCR.
In my fantasy people were cheering. And there I was. In a pro uniform. I was older. But I still
looked pretty much like myself.
The game clock was at five seconds. Four. Three. I set up and took an incredible three-point shot
from mid-court.
Swish!
The stadium went crazy! Cheering. Horns sounding. People chanting my name.
And there was Cassie, in the stands. Smiling at me. She was sitting with my parents.
And there was Tom.
He walked out onto the court and threw his arms around me. He patted me on the back.
"Great game," he said. "As usual."
End of fantasy. The images disappeared.
68
I felt very small suddenly. Very unimportant. Very weak.
Ah, yes, the Yeerk said, and laughed. It shocks you that I can play your thoughts back for
you. Your brain is no different to me than one of your primitive human computers. I open any
file I like. I play any software. I use you. I own you. I dominate you. You are nothing anymore.
Just an echo. Just a ghost haunting the machine of your own brain!
Yeah? I managed to say. Well, you're a screw-up who is tied up in a cabin in the woods. In
three days, you're dead.
I won't be here three days, he said.
You'll be here, far from your stinking Yeerk pool. No Kandrona rays. And you'll shrivel and die
and crawl out of me. I had been calm. But then, I lost control. You'll die! You'll die like the
others died! You think you'll win? You'll lose! You'll LOSE! You can't control me! You can't
control me! You can't control me!
Oh? the Yeerk asked with silky menace. That's just what your brother said. At first. Shall I
show you? Shall I play one of Tom's memories for you? I can feel you cringe. I can feel your
fear. Yes. Yes, I will. Here, enjoy a preview of your future.
It was as if a third mind had joined us. It was real. So completely real. Not like a vision or a
movie or something. I felt this. I felt it exactly as if I were there.
My brother's mind. His thoughts. His memories, as clear as if I were seeing them myself. Tom . .
. some piece of Tom that the Yeerk still carried with him . . .
It was from just a few days earlier.
He was sitting at the breakfast table, across from me. I saw myself through his eyes. I looked . . .
distant. Distracted. Preoccupied.
"Hey, midget. What's up?" he asked me.
"Not much. How about you?"
"Oh, I'm going to a meeting."
"The Sharing?" I asked him.
"Yeah. We're doing some cleanup in the park. You know, do our part for the community and all.
Then we're having a barbecue afterward. You really should join, you know. We'd get to spend
more time together."
It was just as I remembered it. Except that now, I felt Tom's emotions, not mine.
The real Tom. The true Tom who was crushed beneath the Yeerk's control.
69
He was crying. Sobbing, helplessly, silently.
Not Jake, he cried. Leave Jake alone. Leave my brother alone. I'll . . . look, I'll never trouble
you again. I swear it. Just leave Jake alone.
The Yeerk waited while the full impact of direct contact with Tom's mind sank into my own.
Tom was defeated. Desperate. He spent his time wishing he could die.
He had given up any hope of escape. Given up.
That's how it always is, the Yeerk said. At first the host fights, or at least tries. But hour after
hour and day after day they see that they cannot rule their own bodies. The host sees that no-one
even knows what has happened to him. No one knows he is lost in his own head. And, over time,
hope dies. The host becomes a faint, shattered creature. Like your brother.
The Yeerk was telling the truth. That was what made it so terrible. It was true. I could feel Tom's
complete, utter despair.
I could feel that he had accepted defeat.
I knew that all he wished for now was an end.
And I knew, also, that I was no stronger than Tom.
But still, one hope lingered in me. Three days, I told the Yeerk. In three days you will die.
Wait and see, human. Just wait and see.
70
Chapter 18
I found out very late that first night why the Yeerk was so confident.
Rachel was keeping guard. Tobias was nearby in a tree.
They had brought food - some sandwiches and some juice, which "I" had eaten. Then, as Rachel
sat nearby, reading a book by the light of a flashlight, the Yeerk pretended to sleep.
I guess in a way I did actually sleep. I was mentally exhausted. I was weary and depressed. More
tired than I have ever been in my life. And yet afraid that if I dreamed, the Yeerk would watch
my dreams.
My fear was justified. I did dream. The same dream I'd had before.
I was the tiger. Tom was my prey.
We were in the dark, deep woods, and I was hunting him with all my tiger skill. He was
stumbling and noisy and weak.
I knew I would take him.
At last, too tired to run any further, Tom fell. He waited, helpless, while I gathered the power of
my tiger body and prepared to leap . . .
And then, I was no longer the tiger. I was my own prey. I watched through eyes wide with terror
as the tiger sprang.
I woke up. My eyes were already open.
Interesting dream, the Yeerk said. Very metaphorical.
I looked out through the eyes the Yeerk had opened. Rachel was still sitting back against the
wall. Her book was open on her lap. But her breathing was heavy and regular. Her eyes were
closed.
She had fallen asleep!
Her flashlight was still on. It shone across the rough wood floor. It illuminated my right arm and
leg.
My arm ... my leg ... they had changed! My arms were thicker, more powerful, and growing
larger still. My hands had swollen and become huge. The fingers were disappearing, replaced by
curved claws as sharp as stilettos.
Orange-and-black-striped fur appeared, a rippling wave that grew to cover me.
I was becoming the tiger!
71
The realization hit me like a jolt of electricity. I was morphing!
The Yeerk was morphing!
How could I have been so stupid? Of course! The Yeerk controlled my hands and feet and voice,
he controlled my very mind. Of course he had my morphing power, too!
The others . . . they didn't realize. They didn't understand. They had tied me up, but it was
useless. The Yeerk had access to every one of my morphs.
The ropes around my hands were painfully tight as my wrists swelled to become powerful
forepaws.
The Yeerk raised the rope and used the tiger's teeth to tear the rope apart.
I wanted to warn Rachel. She was still asleep. I had to warn her. The Yeerk would escape. He
might even kill her.
But try as I might, I could not reach my own body any longer. I could not reach my own body.
I won't kill her, the Yeerk said. Like you, she is capable of morphing. I will deliver Visser
Three four morph-capable humans, as well as one Andalite scum.
I now saw the world through tiger's eyes. The night was brighter. And I heard with tiger's ears.
Ears that caught any sound that might be made by a predator.
The tiger sniffed the air. But the breeze was slight, and carried no warnings.
What a wonderful animal this is, this tiger, the Yeerk said. Excellent senses. Fast and silent
and deadly.
The forest was dark and quiet, but for the rustling of leaves in the trees above. Absolute silence,
as the tiger crept away. No sound as the tiger melted into the shadows. And Rachel still slept.
Soon the shack could no longer be seen. The beam of Rachel's flashlight was swallowed by
black night.
But the Yeerk was uncertain now. He did not know where we were. He did not know which way
to go.
And then ... a sound. A smell.
Humans!
72
What are humans doing here? He opened my memory. He searched my brain for an
explanation. I had none. Your own thoughts tell me it is wrong. It is very late. Humans, this
deep in the forest?
The Yeerk moved away from the human scent. They might be hunters. They might be park
rangers. Those were the possibilities he had pulled from my own brain.
The Yeerk sent the tiger body into a loping run. But after just ten minutes, the tiger tired and he
had to slow down. Tigers are not distance runners.
Which way? the Yeerk wondered.
And then . . . once again. Human scent. Human sounds.
I looked through the tiger's eyes and saw nothing. The Yeerk once more turned from the human
scent.
The Yeerk searched my memory. South. I must go south. But which way is south? Anything
else will send me deeper into the forest.
I guess you're lost, I said. The first thing I had said to the Yeerk in a long time.
Shut up, slave. Once the sun rises in the morning I will know the way to go.
Two hours in a morph, I reminded him. lf I'm stuck in tiger morph, then this body will be
useless to you. Visser Three will want my body morph-capable.
Don't tell me what Visser Three wants, the Yeerk said.
But the Yeerk knew time was passing. He had to morph back to my normal human shape.
Moments later, I was watching the world through human senses. The night vision was less acute.
The ears heard too little. The human nose could scarcely smell a thing.
The Yeerk walked, pushing on as fast as my human body could move with no shoes.
In a hurry to go nowhere? I asked.
I know where I'm going, the Yeerk snapped. Then he stopped. Hah! I should have thought of
it. Of course! The falcon morph. I will simply fly away.
I watched like it was a TV program. Like I was far away from my own body. I watched with
interest as the body shrank. As wings sprouted. As talons appeared. As -
WHAM!
The half-bird, half-human body went rolling, end over end across the ground.
73
What? the Yeerk demanded. What hit me?
He looked around frantically. But falcon eyes are for daytime hunting. They are stunningly good
in sunlight. In the dark, they are nothing special.
The Yeerk continued to morph. Falcon feathers grew, the wings became more fully formed.
WHAM!
A shadow within shadows. A sense of something dark that disappeared before the Yeerk could
turn the falcon's head. From far away I realized the falcon body had been injured. There was a
deep, bloody gash in the right shoulder.
The Yeerk was beginning to be afraid.
WHAM!
A hammer blow! A ripping of flesh and ten don.
The invisible enemy had struck again. The falcon would not be able to take wing. Not now. The
falcon was crippled. Disabled by a silent, invisible enemy.
And then I felt hope come alive in me again.
Because even as the Yeerk, crying in pain, demorphed and returned to human form, I saw the
enemy.
It landed on a branch. It was outlined against faint moonlight and infrequent stars. The two little
tufts on its head inspired its name.
The great horned owl, I said to the Yeerk.
I can read your every thought, you don't need to tell me what it is, the Yeerk snapped.
Oh, but I enjoy telling you. It's a great horned owl. It flies without making a sound. Tobias
watches them hunt sometimes. Tobias says they can hear a mouse burp from a hundred yards
away. He says they can see a bug blink on a coal-black night. I laughed silently in my corner of
my own brain. I laughed at the Yeerk. As far as that owl is concerned, you might as well have a
spotlight on you.
Then, to my amazement, Cassie's thought- speak was in my head. A voiceless voice that seemed
to belong in a different life.
Sorry I had to hurt you, Jake. But it was necessary. We realized the Yeerk would try morphing.
So we were ready. Rachel only pretended to sleep. We wanted this Yeerk of yours to make his
escape when we were most ready for him. So you hang in, Jake. The forest is full of your
friends.
74
The humans the tiger had smelled. ... My friends.
Then I felt it again. The sensation that filled me with a grim sort of pleasure. I felt the Yeerk's
fear.
It was good to know that he was afraid.
It was very good.
75
Chapter 19
I could feel the Yeerk opening my memory like a book again. He was checking through the list
of all the morphs I had ever done.
Dog. Fish. Flea. Seagull. Dolphin. Ant. Wolf.
I knew what he must be thinking. Which could he use to evade the watchful owl in the tree
above us? The owl who saw through the night like it was day, and heard the sounds no human
could hear.
She can't stay in owl morph forever, the Yeerk said. She has a two-hour time limit. Just as I
do.
But of course there's Rachel and Marco and Ax. You don't know how many of them are here.
You don't know where they are or what they are.
Can the owl watch a flea? I doubt it. Or an ant? The Yeerk smirked.
True. But how far can a flea travel in the two-hour time limit? Twenty yards? Thirty? Then you
have to demorph and my friends will have no trouble finding you.
Shut up! he yelled, losing patience.
I reveled in his anger. It meant he was scared. It also meant something else. I could not control
my arms or legs. I could not even keep my mind closed from him. But he could not stop my
thoughts. He could not stop me from talking to him.
And I had the power to annoy him. To distract him when he should be focused on escaping.
You think you can harass me? he said, reading my thoughts as soon as I had them. You
overestimate yourself.
You underestimate us, Yeerk. You thought you'd just morph and walk away. You guessed
wrong. And your three days is less than two and a half already. Tick tock, Yeerk. Tick tock.
Let's see whether your owl friend can handle a wolf as easily as she handled the falcon.
He began morphing. The wolf form was one I had enjoyed. Wolves are not subject to much fear.
And their instincts are easily manipulated. Not like ants. Or the lizard that was one of my earliest
morphs.
I watched as my body sprouted gray fur. As my face bulged out to become a long snout. As my
ears slid up the side of my head to rest on top.
I see our owl friend is keeping her distance the Yeerk said. l thought as much.
76
He set out at a fast trot. Unlike tigers, wolves are long-distance travelers. They can cover
amazing distances at a run. And worse, the wolf brain seemed to have some interior sense of
direction. It knew which way was deeper into woods, and which way led to the city.
We ran through woods, through a night as dark as night can be. Clouds hung low over the forest,
allowing only the palest glow from the moon.
A quick jog back to what passes for civilization on this planet, demorph to human, and your
friends will be powerless to stop me, the Yeerk said.
I wondered who he was trying to convince. Me, or himself?
You're an arrogant bunch, aren't you? You Yeerks, I mean.
Arrogant? Why wouldn't we be? We are the most powerful race in the galaxy. Overlords of the
Taxxons. Conquerors of the Hork-Bajir and the Ssstram and the Mak. Soon to be conquerors of
the humans.
Don't count the humans just yet, I said. And there are still the Andalites.
We'll save the Andalites for last, he hissed.
He stopped moving and pricked up his wolf's ears. There came a distinct howling sound. Loud
and not very far away, it rose and warbled and rose again before dying away.
A second wolf voice howled.
Another wolf. Two, the Yeerk said. I felt him contact the wolf's own submerged instinctive
mind. What was the meaning of the howling?
A notice. A warning to any other wolves that we are here. Don't come around, unless you want
to risk a fight.
Suddenly I realized what it meant. I laughed.
This is an area we were in before, I said. As wolves. We discovered - 
Silence! I know what you found. When will you figure out that I can read your memory as well
as you can?
We found another pack of wolves. They think this is their territory, I went on, enjoying the
fact that I was bothering him. Those howls you hear? Those are my friends. They're calling to
the other wolf pack. Better run faster, Yeerk. That big male who runs the other pack is tough.
The Yeerk began running all out, pushing the wolf body for all the speed and endurance it had.
The dark tree trunks were a blur as we ran through the night, followed by the howls of wolves
who were not wolves.
77
Then, a smell on the wind. The smell of an other wolf. A male wolf.
I believe that's my old friend now, I said, laughing.
The Yeerk stopped running.
Ahead, through the trees, a pair of glittering yellow eyes glared at us. Other eyes appeared. Five
wolves - five real wolves - waited for us to try to move forward.
Go ahead? I taunted the Yeerk. Go kick his butt. Of course, that's a real wolf there. An alpha
male. Leader of his pack, which means he's probably been in a dozen fights and won them all.
Go on, Yeerk. Tell him how the Yeerks are masters of the galaxy. I'm sure he'll be very
impressed.
I could sense the Yeerk's hesitation. His uncertainty.
So many species on this planet, he said to himself. So many balances and connections.
Everything preying on everything else. Every power is checked by some other power. Every ad
vantage is canceled by some disadvantage.
Yeah. Earth. It's a tough neighborhood.
When we take this planet, we will eliminate these species. We will simplify. Things should be
simpler. Yes, much simpler.
I have a news flash for you, Yeerk. I don't think you're going to take this planet. I think this
planet is going to take you.
Just then, a human voice. "So. You about done playing games? Ready to come back to the
shack?"
It was Marco. He was shoeless and wearing his morphing outfit. He had been one of the wolves
who'd led us straight into the enemy pack.
Marco shivered. "Look, Mr. Yeerk, it's cold and I'm freezing. I always knew this situation with
the morphing outfits was going to be trouble some day. So come on. Let's go back to the shack."
For a moment the Yeerk was so enraged he was ready to leap at Marco and tear out his throat.
But then, lumbering up behind Marco came Rachel. The very large version of Rachel with the
trunk, the big leathery ears, and the two huge tusks.
Marco seemed to guess what had gone through the Yeerk's mind. "Go ahead. Try some thing. A
wolf pack ahead. A very large, surprisingly fast African elephant behind you. And more
surprises in the woods all around you. Oh, and one more thing . . . Cassie is nestled down in your
fur. Sucking your blood, I imagine. She did the flea thing."
78
I realized then that there is a very basic difference between Yeerks and humans.
A human will fight even when he knows he can't win. Maybe our species is just a little crazy.
But human history is full of cases where a handful of guys would fight an entire army. They'd get
stomped, but they'd fight anyway.
That's not the way it is for Yeerks. They are ruthless. They will do anything, absolutely anything
to win. But when the situation is impossible, totally impossible, they stop fighting. They figure
that other Yeerks will carry on the fight for them.
Different ways of looking at your world.
You are fools, the Yeerk said, having read my thoughts. It is madness to fight when you
cannot win.
Yes, it is foolish. It is crazy, I agreed. And it's why we will win.
The Yeerk demorphed and returned to human form. My human form.
Marco walked away into the woods. Rachel rumbled off. And a few minutes later, an owl
appeared to lead the way back to the shack.
79
Chapter 20
The next morning, when it seemed like no one was watching, the Yeerk tried again. He morphed
into an ant. He got three feet before running into a group of ants from a different colony. About
forty of them attacked. They were ripping the ant body apart when the Yeerk
demorphed and returned to human form.
This is a savage planet, he said. We will tame this world, when we take it over. But I don't
think even he believed it anymore.
It was around nine in the morning on Saturday that the Yeerk first took over my body and brain.
By Monday evening, when the sun went down, he was growing distracted, unable to concentrate
clearly.
By the time the moon rose in a newly clear, starry sky, he was weak with hunger. His slug body
cried out for Kandrona rays the way a human would cry for food or water.
I could feel his arrogance evaporate. I could feel his despair.
He still had fantasies of being rescued. But he couldn't make those fantasies end very well. Even
if he was rescued, he would no longer be the big hero who had destroyed the Animorphs.
He would try to think of clever ways to outwit my friends, but he could never be sure who was in
the woods around us. Or what form they might have taken.
He tried to take on a bird shape again, reforming the peregrine falcon. The DNA had not been
affected by the injuries Cassie had caused to the earlier morph, of course. The falcon was fine.
But it was daylight this time, and Tobias landed while the falcon was still half-morphed. He
grabbed the falcon head in his talon and simply explained that if the Yeerk did not demorph, he
would be killed.
For the first time, the Yeerk broke his silence with the others and spoke as a Yeerk.
If you kill me, you'll kill your friend, as well, he warned.
Yes, Tobias said. I know.
You won't do it
Right from the start we have all said the same thing - better to die than be a Controller. Tobias
said. But in any case, I don't need to kill you. I can simply put your eyes out. A blind falcon
doesn't fly far.
The Yeerk surrendered and demorphed.
We waited, as the minutes and hours of the night ticked away. He still hoped for a miracle to
save him. But his hunger was a terrible thing, growing with every second.
80
You think you'll win, he sneered at me. You won't win. Your people are blind to what is
happening. And the Andalites will not return in time.
Maybe. But you won't be there to see it, I said. It must be four in the morning. Five hours
left. Ticktock.
You're a cruel little human, aren't you?
I don't think so, no.
You know I am dying and you laugh at me.
What do you expect? Pity?
He laughed. No. We don't offer pity. And we don't expect pity. We are the masters of the
galaxy. Conquerors of the Hork-Bajir and - 
Yeah, yeah, I know. The mighty Yeerk empire.
After that he said nothing to me for a while. It was impossible to sleep. He sat with my eyes
open. He was too hungry to rest. The hunger infiltrated his mind. It twisted his thoughts.
The Yeerk home world is a simpler place than this planet. Simple and elegant. No more than a
hundred animal species. What do you have on Earth? A million species? More? What does a
planet need with a million species?
I didn't answer. His time was running out. Let him talk.
We Yeerks evolved as parasites, not predators. Unlike you humans, we did not kill to eat. We
were peaceful. We took many different species as our hosts. And as they evolved, so did we.
Over time, the Gedds evolved. They were a sort of ... like a monkey, I suppose. We were in the
Gedds till the Andalites first came. Some of our people still have nothing better than Gedds for
hosts.
What about the Andalites? I asked. What happened when they came to your world?
Of course. The Andalite has not told you their story, has he? What a pity. It's such a fine story.
Ask your pet Andalite Ax sometime. Ask him about the story of the Andalites and the Yeerks.
Maybe I will, I said. I hoped the Yeerk would keep talking, but he fell silent.
The hours passed. An owl left and was replaced by another. The moon went down. Dawn was
coming. I could feel it.
Yes, the Yeerk said, having read my thoughts. Dawn. Just a few hours left. Ahhhh! He
cried out in silent pain. The fugue. It begins.
The fugue?
81
The final hours. You will not enjoy it, although you may learn a great deal, human. You may
learn more than you want to - aaaahhh!
I was watching his pain from far away. I was an observer. Close enough to know what he was
feeling, but feeling none of it myself.
At first it was wave after wave of pain. Starvation and death by thirst. All rolled into one agony.
The sun came up. Cassie stepped into the shack from the woods outside. She looked at me and
nodded. "It's happening, isn't it?"
I wanted to answer, but even now, my voice was not my own.
Cassie came and sat down beside me. Beside us.
"Ax says this part is pretty rough. Just remember, when it's all over, I'll be here."
She slipped her hand into my hand. I could feel it. So could the Yeerk. But he did not reject this
small bit of comfort, even though it was intended for me and not him.
His mind was deteriorating. His thoughts were becoming more visible to me. Like a movie that
kept drifting in and out of focus.
I saw images from a strange place, as seen through strange eyes. Liquid all around. Shapes, like
squids, shooting through the liquid. Yeerks. Swimming in the Yeerk pool. Soaking up Kandrona
rays.
And there were images of the first host. A Gedd. So, I thought - that's what a Gedd looks like. I
had seen a few aboard the Yeerk mother ship but had not known what they were. They were
humanoid, short and stooped, with webbed feet and three clumsy fingers.
I saw the world as the Yeerk had seen it, through Gedd eyes. The vision was dim. The hearing
was better. The Yeerk had been excited at getting his first host. He had subdued the Gedd mind
with ruthless ease, crushing it with his superior intelligence and will.
The memory made me sick. The Gedd's bewilderment. His fear. And the Yeerk's fierce
arrogance.
I turned my attention away from the memory and back to the world around me. To my surprise, I
noticed that my arms were shaking. My legs were shaking.
Cassie had put her arm around my shoulders.
"Jake, if you can hear me, it's almost eight. One hour to go. Jake ... the Yeerk in your head is
dying."
"Yes," I wanted to say. "He is."
82
Chapter 21
The fugue.
The final hours of the Yeerk's life. I was watching him die.
A lot has happened to me since I first saw the Andalite prince land in that construction site. More
strange things than happen to most people in their entire lives. But the strangest was this. And
the saddest.
The Yeerk cried in pain, again and again. And the visions came floating up, crystal clear, as if
they had just happened.
Visions of the good times in the Yeerk's life. And of bad times. The emotions were strange.
Alien. I guess that's the word for them. There was no memory of love. I guess Yeerks don't do
love.
But there was affection. Pride. Fear. Regret. Those I could understand.
And along with the Yeerk's own memories, I began to see the minds of his hosts. The Gedd who
had a name no human could hope to pronounce. The Hork-Bajir warrior who had fought the
Yeerk in his head every day of his life.
The Hork-Bajir, who had been forced to attack his own kind, to destroy his own friends, as an
unwilling slave of the Yeerks.
But it was more than just memories. It was more. The Yeerk had carried with him some small
part of that Hork-Bajir warrior's being.
Like a computer transferring a document onto a floppy disk, I realized. Part of the Gedd and part
of the Hork-Bajir had been transferred permanently to the Yeerk.
And to my shock, I knew that those parts were now being transferred to me.
And then ... the memories I feared most.
Tom.
He had joined The Sharing for a simple, silly reason. A pretty girl he liked was a member. He
had wanted to get close to her. He had gone to meetings. He'd played along with them, never
guessing the truth. All he had cared about was the girl.
He had stumbled, accidentally, into a secret leadership meeting. He thought the girl was seeing
another boy. But she was one of them.
He had followed her, wandered into the meet ing and seen Visser Three. Visser Three in his
Andalite body.
83
I saw the Controllers grab a yelling, punching, kicking Tom. I saw as they tied him up. Carried
him through secret passageways to the great, underground Yeerk pool.
I saw him scream as he realized what was happening. I felt his fear. I felt his rage as the Yeerk
slug crawled into his ear and wrapped itself around his brain. I felt every ounce of his despair.
And like the Gedd and the Hork-Bajir, this human, my brother, became a part of me.
The Yeerk was no longer in pain. It was beyond pain.
I opened my eyes and looked at Cassie. It happened so naturally. I opened my eyes. By my own
will.
I don't know how she knew, but I guess she did. She nodded slightly and met my gaze.
For the first time in more than an hour, the Yeerk spoke. So. You win . . . human.
The Yeerk shuddered. I could feel it. A physical spasm. My vision changed. I felt. . . it's hard to
describe. I felt as if I were seeing through things, into things. Like I could see the front and back
and top and bottom and inside of every thing all at once.
And then I saw it.
A creature. Or a machine. Some combination of both. It had no arms. It sat still, as if unable to
move, on a throne that was miles high.
Its head was a single eye. The eye turned slowly . . . left. . . right . . .
I trembled. I prayed it would not look my way.
And then it saw me.
The eye, the bloodred eye, looked straight at me.
It saw me.
It SAW me!
No! NO! I cried in silent terror. I looked away.
And when I opened my eyes again, all I saw was a weird glow.
The glow faded, little by little.
I was trembling.
"It's over, Jake," Cassie said.
84
I rose slowly to my feet. I moved my own legs. I was in control of myself again.
I looked down on the wooden floor of the shack.
A gray slug, not six inches long, lay there . . . still.
As we watched, it withered and shriveled and became nothing.
85
Chapter 22
Jake? Are you all right, sweetheart?" my mom asked me that night at dinner.
I looked up. I'd been staring at my food, I realized. Something with pasta and tuna fish.
"What?" I asked.
My mom and dad exchanged one of their "worried parent" looks. "Well, you're not eating. Don't
you like it?"
I shrugged. "Sorry. It's fine. I was just . . . distracted."
My dad nodded. "It's just a change from the last two nights. You've been eating like you were
trying to eat everything in the house."
"I was?"
Tom cocked an eyebrow at me. "What, now you're going to pretend it didn't happen? Last night
you sat here and ate six pieces of chicken and kept yapping about how great it was. Then you ate
a pie. A pie which was supposed to be for the four of us."
I hid a smile. Of course. Ax. The Andalite had played me for three days - two hours at a time. Ax
was dangerous around food. The sense of taste was still totally amazing to him. When he was in
human morph you didn't want to get between him and a bar of chocolate. Or a pie, I guess.
"You were a total pig," Tom said. "Chicken. Corn. Potatoes. Or, as you kept saying, 'Potatoes.
Toes. Tay-toes.' I thought you'd gone nuts."
And were you suspicious, Yeerk? I thought, looking at my brother. A new Yeerk was in Tom's
head. Another arrogant master of the galaxy.
My brother was trapped in a small corner of his own mind, able to see and feel, but powerless to
do a thing. I knew.
I didn't sleep much that night. I did not want the dreams to come. I feared terrible nightmares of
the eye. The eye that had stared at me from a different universe.
But the only dream that came was a familiar one.
I was the tiger. My brother was the prey. But, in the end, I was my brother. And he was me.
On the news that night there was a small report on the closing of the new hospital. There was no
explanation. But I knew what had happened. The Yeerks knew their plan was blown. They
understood that we knew about it.
We had hurt them pretty badly.
86
But I knew better than to celebrate. Visser Three would be more determined than ever to stop us.
The next day I did something stupid. At least, Marco kept telling me it was stupid. But he didn't
object very much. He understood.
We all met at Cassie's barn. And I used her dad's cellular phone to call Tom at home. I went
partly into a wolf morph before I did. Just enough to make the smallest changes.
Enough to change the shape of my mouth and tongue and throat. So that my voice would sound
very different.
He picked it up on the third ring. "Yeah?"
"I have a message," I said in a thick, twisted voice that did not sound at all like me.
"What?" Tom asked.
"Don't give up, Tom. Don't ever give up."
I hung up before he could say anything.
"Do you think Tom ... the real Tom . . . heard it?" Rachel asked.
"He heard," I answered.
I wondered if he would have the strength to hold on.
But I knew the answer. See, a part of my brother was in my own mind now. Along with echoes
of a long-dead Hork-Bajir and a simple Gedd. And yes, even a bit of a Yeerk with dreams of
glory.
Marco smiled his sardonic smile. "And is it true? Will we win?"
"This is a very complicated planet, Marco. That's what I hear, anyway. And it's a very strange
universe. Anything could happen."






















# The Android
 My name is Marco. People call me Marco the Magnificent. Mar-velous Marco. The
Amazing Marco. And of course, all the girls just call me ... gorgeous. Okay, maybe
I've never actually heard anyone call me gorgeous, but I am confident that
someone, somewhere, must have called me gorgeous at some point. Or not. But
definitely cute. I've heard "cute" with my own ears. And I'll soon be hearing it a lot
more because I've made a major change. I've cut my hair. Or at least my stylist,
Charise, cut it for me. That's right, Charise. And according to Charise, my cuteness
quotient has risen from a nine to a definite ten.
Anyway, where was I? Oh, yes. I was telling
you that my name is Marco. I can't tell you my last
name. I forgot it.
No, not really, I'm kidding. I know my last name.
I'm just not going to tell you. And I'm not
going to tell you the complete names of my
friends or where I live.
What I will tell you is the truth.
All except for
that part about "magnificent" and "marvelous."
Everything else I tell you will be true. I know it
will seem incredible. But it will be the absolute
truth.
Let's start with the reason why I won't tell you
my last name: I have enemies. We all sorta do.
But these guys are very powerful, very dangerous
enemies. Not like the guy in your class who keeps
calling you "dork-wad." And if they knew who I
was, I'd be dead so fast I wouldn't even
know I was dead. The Yeerks don't play games.
The Yeerks don't worry about pity or kindness.
They don't care that I'm just a kid. The Yeerks
plan to enslave or destroy the entire human
race.
They won't hesitate to roll right over little old
me.
The Yeerks aren't just
my
enemies, though.
They are the enemies of every human being. The enemies
of Earth itself. And they are everywhere.
They're a parasitic species. Think
tapeworms.
That's what they are, when you get right down to
it: intelligent tapeworms.
They are slugs, just a few inches long. They enter
the human body through the ear canal. Once inside,
they flatten themselves out and
wrap themselves around your brain. They squeeze into all
the folds and wrinkles of your brain and
tie into your thoughts.
They take over. They make you into what we
call a Controller. A human machine. A body
whose own, true mind is shattered and
helpless.
That's the special horror of the Yeerks. They
don't just take over your mind and eliminate you.
You continue to be aware. You continue to be conscious.
You sit there in your own head watching the Yeerk open
your memory, watching the
Yeerk fool your friends and family, watching the
Yeerk turn the people you love into the same kind
of slave you've become.
You try to move your hand, but you can't. You try
to make your mouth speak, but you can't. You don't even
control what your eyes look at. That's
what it's like.
My mother is one of them. A Controller.
For a long time, we thought she had died. I
believed she had drowned. But I learned later
that she was still alive.
A very powerful Yeerk had taken her body. I
don't even know how long she was a Controller
before she disappeared. I don't know how many times her
good-night kiss was the action of a Yeerk trying
to pass as a human.
 She is Visser One now. A Visser is a
sort of Yeerk warlord or general. Visser One
launched the secret invasion of Earth.
Visser Three is now in charge.
 Visser One, in my mother's head, took off after
faking her death by drowning. She's somewhere now . . .
maybe millions of miles away.
 No one knows about my mom but me and my best friend,
Jake. I don't want the others to know. I
don't want their pity.
 The Yeerks are here. Everywhere. Not just my mother, but
maybe yours, too. Maybe your teacher, maybe your
best friend, maybe everyone around you. When you get together
with family and friends, you may be the only one in the
room who is not a Controller.
 That's why we fight them. We Animorphs.
 I made up that word, by the way. Pretty cool,
huh? Animorphs. Just popped into my head.
Animal morpher.
 See, not every alien in the universe is a Yeerk.
The universe has its heroes, too. It was one
dying, doomed Andalite who gave us our power
to acquire the DNA of any animal and then
to become that animal.
 His name was Elfangor. He, and a lot of other
Andalites, died trying to save Earth from the
Yeerks.
So for him, and for all the people of Earth, we
fight, hoping to slow the Yeerks down enough so that the
Andalites will have a chance to come
again and save us all.
Who is "we"? Well, there's me, Marco the
Magnificent.
Then, there's Rachel-who-thinks-she's-Xena.-
Warrior Princess.
And there's Tobias, the Bird-boy. And
Cassie, the tree-hugger. And Ax, our
resident Andalite.
And of course, our fearless leader, my boy,
Jake.
My way-too-serious best friend Jake.
Responsible, practically adult Jake.
Jake, who grinds my nerves with his total
refusal to just have a good time.
"Look," I said to Jake, "it's not a crime or
anything. There is absolutely no law against dogs
going to outdoor concerts. They don't have a
ticket for dogs."
"You know, Marco, the point of morphing is not for us
to get into concerts," Jake said.
We were walking down one of the streets of our
subdivision. We'd shot some hoops down at the
outdoor basketball court, and now Jake
was
dribbling the ball as we walked.
"Nine Inch Nails. Alanis. Offspring," I
said.
He stopped and stared at me. "Marco?"
 "Yeah?"
 "What happened to your hair, man?"
 "You're just noticing? Looks cool, huh?"
 Jake just stared. "Offspring?" he asked.
"You're sure Offspring will be there?"
 I could see him weakening. He was dribbling slower.
"I hear they are so great live. They kick. They
dominate. They crush all opposition under foot.
They rule. They -"
 "Marco, after I've criticized Rachel and
Cassie for using morphing for personal reasons,
I can't just -"
 "Who's going to tell them?" I argued. I ran
my fingers through my new, shorter hair. It was
cool-looking. I wasn't even going to pay
attention to the way Jake just stared at it. It looked
cool.
 "I'd be a hypocrite," Jake said.
 I thought for a moment. "You know, Jake . . . I
have long suspected that Alanis may be a
Controller. And, as a Controller, think of the
damage she could do by leading young, impressionable kids
like us astray. Oh, I hate to even think of it!
We have a duty, Jake. We have a sacred
duty to
go to that concert and to find out once and for all whether any
of these major stars are Controllers."
 Jake smiled his slow smile. "That is easily
the most pathetic excuse you have ever come up with."
I laughed. "Get serious. I've come up with
lots of more pathetic excuses than that."
 We were almost at Jake's house, so we stopped.
Jake's brother Tom is one of
them
-
a Controller. We don't talk inside his house.
 "You know," Jake said, "the only possible way
I could go along with this is if I found out
you
were going to this thing anyway. Then, see, I'd have to go
along -- reluctantly -- just to watch your back."
 Jake may be responsible and all, but he
isn't a total forty-year-old.
 I grinned. "Jake, I'm going to this concert,
whether you like it or not."
 "Then I guess I'd better go, just to cover your
butt," Jake said. "You'll have to figure out how
to cover that hair."
 I made a face. "Real funny."
 "I thought so," Jake said, grinning at his own
wit. "I'm going to morph Homer, I guess.
You're right. Dog is the way to go. No one will even
think anything about us being there, since there are always
dogs at outdoor stuff. And dog hearing is great.
You need to acquire a dog morph."
 "Already have," I said smugly. "An Irish
setter. Girls love Irish setters. Heh,
heh, heh."
 I laughed my "evil" laugh and gave Jake a
look, and he laughed, too.
 There are these moments in your life that
seem totally innocent at first, you know? Like normal
everyday life. But then it's like you stepped
off a cliff, and before you know it you're falling.
Suddenly you realize your innocent little decision has
gone spinning out of control.
I had decided to sneak into a concert. I had not
decided to uncover one of the greatest secrets of
human history, or become the person
who would decide the fate of an entire
race.
I just wanted to hear some music.
It should have been no big deal.
here are a couple of big problems with morphing.
First of all, there's the two-hour time
limit. If you stay in morph for more than two
hours, you stay forever.
Second, there is the fact that all of the ani
mal's basic instincts come along with the body.
Sometimes when you jump into that animal brain it's like
grabbing onto a power line.
Finally, there is the total creepiness factor.
I mean, major,
Stephen-King-meets-Ann-Rice
creepy.
The concert was taking place at this big outdoor arena
that's at one end of the city park. We needed a
private place to morph, but that turned
out not to be so easy. There were people everywhere.
Thousands of people. Kids in black T-shirts.
Displaced Deadheads with little granny sunglasses
and dreadlocks. Parental units carrying babies
and trying to look cool in their Dockers.
And hardcore punk rockers with pierced everythings.
Across from the park there was this little street with coffee
shops and restaurants and an ecology bookstore.
There were alleys behind the restaurants, and we headed
there.
Down one alley we found a little dead-end area
stuffed with Dumpsters.
"Wonderful," Jake muttered. "The two of us
and the garbage. This is already fun."
"Come on, let's do it," I said. I was
impatient.
I could hear a warm-up band racing through a
power set.
"You haven't morphed a dog before, have
you?" Jake asked me.
"No."
He smiled. "Don't get
too
happy," he said.
I didn't really pay any attention to him. I
looked around and saw some hippie girls walking
by. They couldn't see us. I removed my outer
clothing and stripped down to my morphing suit.
I stuffed my clothes and shoes into the bag Jake and
I had brought along and shoved it behind the
Dumpster.
I focused on the dog I had acquired. I saw
it
in my mind. And as I focused, I felt the
changes
begin.
I've morphed much weirder things than dogs.
But every morph is strange. Every morph is un
predictable. You really never know how it's going
to go.
I expected the first thing to be fur. It wasn't.
The first thing that happened was the tail. I felt it
just sort of spurt out of the base of my spine.
I turned to look back over my shoulder. "Oh,
guh-ross!"
The tail was sticking out. But it had no fur
yet. It was just this kind of grayish, chickenskinned
whip.
I looked back at Jake. His face was bulging
out like something was trying to climb out of his
mouth. At the same time my own muzzle started
to grow. There was a weird grinding sound from inside my
head as the bones of my jaw stretched
outward.
I felt an itching in my mouth as my teeth
grew
bigger and rearranged themselves.
I saw my fingers shrink up inside my hands.
At the same time, the little stubs of fingers grew these
gray-black nails. My palms became thick
and calloused.
I felt the bones in my legs and arms stretching,
changing directions, and I began to grow
slightly smaller. Suddenly, I couldn't stand up
anymore. I fell forward onto my calloused
pads.
Only then did the fur begin to grow. It was a
good thing, too. I was one ugly animal without fur.
The reddish fur sprouted quickly, like the
world's fastest grass. It just seemed to explode out
of my skin, long and silky.
Cool. I said to Jake in
thought-speak. Check out this fur. Every
girl in that concert is going to want to pet me.
He said something back to me, but right then
the dog senses kicked in.
I've morphed a wolf, so I was prepared. I
knew the hearing would be amazing. I knew the sense of
smell would be incredible.
But what I didn't expect was the dog's mind.
It was not like the wolf. The wolf was a cool, in
telligent, ruthless killer.
The dog was just a big goof.
You remember that old song, "Girls Just Wanna
Have Fun"? That could be the theme song for dogs.
Dogs just want to have fun.
That's what fooled me. The Irish setter's brain
didn't feel like some strange animal. It felt
like it was just tapping into a part of my own mind. It
was a perfect fit with the goof ball part of my own
brain.
I looked over at Jake through my slightly dim
dog vision. He had become his dog, Homer. I
lolled out my tongue and panted. Jake/homer
panted right back at me.
"RUFF!" I barked, for no reason. I did a
little
dance. Sort of like I was going to run away, but then
I stopped suddenly and crouched down on
my front legs and grinned like an idiot at
Jake.
I was inviting him to play.
I tore off down the alley at a run.
Marco, wait up!
Catch me! Hah-hah! Like you even
could!
I scrabbled away at top speed, my nails
click
ing on the concrete, my floppy ears flying, my
tail
held high and wagging.
I raced down the alleyway, totally ignoring the
rich, wondrous smells of rotting garbage.
I turned toward the park and raced across the
street. Jake fell back, caught up in a
small knot
of people.
 SCRRREEEEECCCCHHH!
A car slammed on its brakes and missed me
by a couple of feet. A couple of feet! I
mean, if
the driver had been one millisecond slower to hit
the brakes, I'd have been roadkill. But my
complete dog-brain reaction to that near-death expe
rience was, "Cool! I smell something!"
I'm totally serious. The fact that I smelled
some other dog's pee on a curb was about ten thousand
times more interesting to my dog brain than the squealing
car was.
 The driver got out and started yelling. I gave
him a happy dog grin and trotted on my way.
 Marco! Would you wait up?
 Suddenly I was surrounded by people. But they were totally
different from the people I'd seen before when I was still
human.
 For one thing, I wasn't really
looking at
these people. I was
smelling
them. What they looked like was so totally not
important. But the smells!
 I smelled sweat, I smelled shampoo, I
smelled bad breath, I smelled what they had been
eating, I smelled what they had stepped in, I
smelled laundry detergent, I smelled everyone
they had touched or shaken hands with.
 And I could smell all their animals. The
humans might as well have been wearing big neon
signs that said i own a dog, or i have cats. I
could not only smell who owned dogs, I could smell
whether the dogs were male or female, young or old,
fixed or not. Just by sniffing the people walking past, I
knew if their dogs ate canned or dry food.
 I mean, when you hook up to that dog nose
it's like you've been walking around with cotton balls
up your nostrils all your life and suddenly
you take them out and wow! Wow! You're into a
whole new experience of life.
I'd been a wolf in the forest. Now it was like I
was a wolf in civilization. The information from
my nose was so complex. So full, so rich, so en
joyable.
"Hey, boy!" someone said. A girl! I was sure
she was a girl. But was she a cute girl? I
tried to
make my dog eyes focus, but it was like sight was
just irrelevant. I could see pretty well, but
my
dog brain was way too busy smelling and hearing.
I did notice the scent of patchouli oil, though.
The girl reached out a hand and stroked my head.
Instantly a warm wave of pleasure washed over
me. Then she scratched behind my ear.
This was almost too good. This was sublime. This was
probably the best thing I'd ever felt in
my life.
I think I could have just stood there and let her scratch
behind my ear forever. But then she was joined by a guy
a guy who owned a cat,
incidentally
-
and she started in on my ribs. I
lay down and rolled on my side. The scratching of
my ribs felt like tickling. I was so happy. I
was
beyond happy.
See, dog happy isn't like human happy.
Human happiness always has this little voice in the
back of your mind going, "Don't be
too
happy.
Keep your guard up. Something bad could still
happen."
But dog happy is just pure, distilled essence of
happiness. I just lolled my wet tongue out and
slapped my tail against the grass, and then it started.
My leg started going all on its own.
"Hah, I love it when dogs do that," the guy
said. "That's so funny!"
His girlfriend scratched away on my ribs and my
back leg just motored away, out of control,
and I was in heaven. That's when Jake found me.
That's nice,Marco. Jake said. Very
dignified. What's next? You going to lick
yourself?
"Oh, it's another dog," the girl said. "He's
even cuter!" She leaned forward to pet Jake.
That brought me to my senses. No way was Jake a
cuter dog than me.
0kay, okay, that's enough playing
around. I said. Come on,
Jake. Let's get closer to the
stage.
We took off, tails wagging, leaving the nice
hippie couple behind.
See? I told you, Marco. Don't
get too happy. A happy dog is almost
too
happy.
Why not? I asked, a little
wistfully. Why
not just get happy?
Then something stunning happened. There had been no
music for a few minutes, and all at
once, Offspring climbed onstage and unloaded.
They ripped into a song and I cowered a little.
The impact on my dog ears was shocking. But it
wasn't just that it was so loud. It was that I could
hear everything. Everything.
Hey! I can understand the lyrics
now. I
said.
Cool. Jake answered.
We trotted closer, into a thickening crowd of
humans. The smells were just overwhelming.
And not always in a good way.
Suddenly, I saw him. He was passing out flyers.
He was walking through the crowd and pass
ing out handbills.
A breeze caught one of the sheets and it fluttered
to the ground in front of me. I forced my dog eyes
to look at it. I couldn't read the fine print, but
I could see the two big words at the
top.
The Sharing.
The Sharing. The front organization for Con
trollers.
Jake. I said. That guy. He's handing out flyers for The Sharing.
Yeah. You know what? Does he
look familiar,
or is it just my imagination?
He had brown hair, just a little over his ears. He
was maybe five feet tall, but he managed to
look taller. A slightly shorter version of
Jake, strong and confident-looking. Yes, he's familiar.
His name's Erek King. He transferred out of our
 school like a year ago.
 Erek was coming closer, smiling and handing
 out flyers to anyone who would take one.
 He knelt down and smiled at me. He reached
 out to pet me, but I pulled back. Erek shrugged
 and walked on his way, handing out flyers.
Jake, did you notice t?
0h, yeah. he said.
Definitely. 0h, man. I said. There
is something very,
 very wrong with Erek.
He
didn't smell," I said.
 "What do you mean, he didn't smell?"
Rachel demanded.
 "I mean that he didn't
smell.
He had picked up some odors off other people, off the
ground, off dogs, whatever, but he had no smell
himself. None. Like a black hole of smell. Like
nothing there, nobody home."
 It was later that same evening. Jake and I had
left the concert shortly after encountering Erek. We'd
called a meeting, and now everyone except Ax was in
Cassie's barn.
 Cassie's barn is actually the Wildlife
Rehabilitation Center. It's a sort of
hospital for messed-up wild animals.
Cassie's parents are both
veterinarians. Her mom works at the Gardens, this
big combination zoo and amusement park.
 Her dad (with a lot of help from Cassie)
takes in every sick or injured wild animal they
come across. The barn is lined with wire cages filled
with raccoons, foxes, opossums, eagles,
rabbits, geese, badgers, crows, squirrels
... I mean, you name it. It's animal central.
 "Maybe you just didn't notice it," Rachel
suggested.
 "Rachel, you've been in wolf morph," Jake
said. "You know how good your sense of smell
is? Well, the dog's sense of smell is almost that
good."
 Rachel shook her head. That's what she does
when she's frustrated.
 She was standing in the middle of the barn floor,
looking immaculate, as usual. Rachel is one
of those girls from the cover of
Seventeen.
Beautiful, fashionable, way too tall, far too
many bright white teeth, massive quantities of very
clean blond hair. But beneath all that fashionable
clothing and perfectly applied makeup there is a
sword-swinging Amazon warrior just trying to break
out.
 Rachel's like one of those terrible elf-maidens in
Tolkien's
The Lord of the Rings
-
beautiful and dangerous.
 Jake is her cousin and Cassie is her best
friend. Cassie actually experiences normal human
emotions like fear and doubt. I approve of this because
I sure experience plenty of fear and doubt myself.
I've experienced more fear and doubt since I
became an Animorph than most people
experience in about ten lifetimes.
 Cassie has never met a dress she liked.
She does not subscribe to
Teen
or
YM.
She's much more likely to buy a magazine like
Smelly Animals of America.
You know, the kind of magazine that would have articles like
"How to Give Suppositories to Raccoons,"
or "Let's Examine Owl Vomit!"
 If you want to picture Cassie, think of a
short, cute girl with very short black hair,
wearing overalls and big muddy boots and looking
totally capable of giving a tetanus shot to an
angry bear.
 Cassie is our animal expert, and our
resident ecology nut. I'd say she likes
animals better than she likes people, except that
she really likes Jake. As in
likes.
 Actually, she and Jake
like
each other, although neither of them will admit it, of
course. The only time they'll act that way
is when we're about twelve seconds away from doing
something insanely dangerous. Then they'll kind of
give each other these pathetic sad looks.
 It's so lame.
 The last original member of our group was
perched in the high rafters overhead. Tobias had his
talons sunk deep into the wood to give himself a
firm hold. And with his hooked beak he was preening the
feathers of his right wing.
 Tobias is a red-tailed hawk. That's what
he's been since he stayed too long in morph.
He lives as a hawk now, mostly. I mean, he
hunts and eats like a hawk. Not that he has much
choice. I don't think the school is really
interested in a Hawk-boy as a student.
 Tobias lives in the woods, along with Ax.
Ax is an Andalite, the brother of Elfangor,
and the only free Andalite within a billion miles
of Earth.
 Ax doesn't come to the meetings, usually. He
has a human morph, but he doesn't like
to overuse it. Besides, he basically figures
Jake is his "prince," and he'll do whatever his
prince tells him has to be done.
 So, that's our little group. Rachel, standing
in the middle of the room, looking like someone was shining a
spotlight on her. Jake, pacing back and forth and
looking far too intense. Cassie, cradling a
duck in her arms while she changed its bandage.
Tobias, preening his feathers and looking around with that
eternal hawk glare. And me, lolling back on a
bale of hay.
 "Shh," Jake said suddenly. "I thought I
heard something."
lt's just a squirrel up on the
roof. Tobias assured him in
thought-speak.
 "You sure?" Jake asked.
 Tobias stopped preening and stared down at
Jake. His hawk stare grew even more intense.
Am I
sure?
I
do
know what a squirrel sounds like.
 Jake nodded and looked a little embarrassed.
Hawks not only have amazingly good eyes, their hearing
is better than human, too. And Tobias knows
the sounds that prey make. He has to. Asking
Tobias if he recognizes squirrel
sounds would be like asking Einstein if he knows how
to add two plus two.
 I tried to bring us all back to the topic. "So,
what does it mean if a kid doesn't smell like
a human?"
 "There are plenty of times when you don't smell
human," Rachel said with a smirk. "But then,
maybe that's because you have a small monkey living on
top of your head."
 Cassie made a snorking sound as she tried not
to laugh.
 "Next time you decide to get a haircut,
talk to me first," Rachel said.
 I ignored them both. We had important
business, and I was not going to lower myself to trading
insults with Rachel. Besides, I couldn't think of
any.
"He doesn't smell,
and
he's handing out flyers for The Sharing," I said.
 "He must be connected to the Yeerks," Rachel said
with a shrug.
 "But how?" Cassie asked. She was pushing the
duck back into his cage. "I mean, Yeerks
infest various species -- humans,
Hork-Bajir, Taxxons. But that doesn't
change the fact that a human with a Yeerk in his head
should still smell like a human. You know?"
 "Chapman is a Controller. He still smells
human," I pointed out. "And by the way, I can't
believe I'm even talking about how the vice
principal smells."
 Jake shrugged. "I guess we need to find out
what's going on with Erek."
 "But how do we find him?" I asked.
"Infiltrate a meeting of The Sharing?"
 I could do surveillance of his
school. Tobias said.
 "Or maybe we could go back to where the concert was and
look for clues," Rachel said. Then she winced.
"Wow, that sounded so Nancy Drew."
 "Maybe Ax can try and tap into the Internet and
get past all the security buffers and locate
him," I suggested.
 Cassie held up her hand like she was asking a
question at school. "Those are all fine plans, but how
about if we just look him up in the phone book?"
 We all just stared at her.
 "Or we could just look him up in the phone
book," Jake said sheepishly.
 Cassie headed for the house to get a phone book.
 "You know, she is just not getting the whole superhero
thing," I said to Jake. "Does Wolverine look
things up in the phone book? Does Spider-man?
I don't think so."
 "Yeah, well, Wolverine has a big
advantage over us," Rachel said dryly.
"He's not real."
 Then she snapped her fingers. "That's what that
hair of yours reminds me of: a wolverine. I
knew it was something."
 "Oh, yeah?" I shot back. "Well, how about
your . . . your ..."
 "My what?" Rachel asked coolly, with the
absolute confidence of a girl who never looked
less than perfect.
 "Your tallness," I said lamely. "You're . .
. tall. Way tall."
 Somehow this brilliant comeback did not cause
Rachel to break down in tears.
 Cassie came back carrying the white pages,
already open to the "Knowledge's." "There are twentyseven
'Kings" listed. But you said he transferred
to Truman, so there are maybe six "Kings" that
are in that part of town."
 "We work our way down the list," I said.
"Although he still could have an unlisted phone."
 "I can't hang out tonight," Jake said. "I have
got
to write that English paper."
 "Here's a clue on the English paper. Don't
say "I have got to,"" I teased.
 "I could go tomorrow, maybe," Rachel said. "But not
tonight. My dad is in town just for tonight. He's taking
me and my sisters to Planet Hollywood."
 Cassie looked at me. "I'm free," she
said.
 l'm good till it gets
dark. Tobias volunteered. Hawks
aren't much use at night.
 "Fine. Me and Cassie and Tobias till it
gets dark," I said. "Shouldn't be too hard. Our
mission: to find the boy who doesn't smell."
 "Maybe he just showers a lot," Rachel said.
"Did you think about that?"
 1 saw Jake the following day in the school
cafeteria.
 I was wolfing down the Goo of the Day, drinking
milk, and trying to write
my
English paper at warp speed. See, I kind of
had some homework due, too. But I'd spent
yesterday evening cruising around in owl morph looking
for Erek's house.
 "English paper?" Jake asked as he sat down
across from me.
 "Yeah."
 He laughed. "You're good for me, Marco.
Compared to you, I'm so responsible. You have a
topic?"
 I looked up at him and thumped my finger
down on the paper. "I've already written three
pages. What do you mean, do I have a topic?"
But Jake knows me. "So," he said.
"Do
you have a topic?"
"A topic will . . . emerge. I'm going to just
write until I discover a topic. The topic will
rise
from these pages. It will reveal itself to me. I just have
to keep writing."
He nodded and made a face at the Goo of the
Day on his tray. "This food is blue. Food
should not be blue. Hey, here's a topic for
you
-
the use
of total bull in the writing of English papers."
I grinned. "I am the master of bull. Three
pages
so far and I haven't actually said a single thing."
"S. Did you guys happen to find our friend?"
I shot a glance left and then right. No one was
seated near enough to overhear us. Besides, the cafeteria was
so noisy from yelling and laughing
and clashing dishes and scraping chairs that no one could
hear much of anything.
"Yeah. We found out where he lives. Saw him through
a window. Too bad, though. One of the other King
residences we checked out had this girl living there who
was amazing."
"You weren't window-peeping, I hope."
I gave Jake my best shocked-and-outraged
look. "How could you even say that? What kind of
person do you think I am?"
Jake nodded. "Cassie wouldn't let you, huh?"
"I am trying to write a paper here," I said.
"On the topic of
...
?"
"On the topic of how to write a thousand words and
say nothing. Zero.
Nada.
Squat."
Jake lowered his voice to just above a whisper.
"We need to check Erek out. Definitely something
wrong there."
I put down my pencil. "You mean get inside
his house?"
Jake shrugged. "Not yet. Get Tobias to watch
him when he's outside. But Tobias will need some
help."
I shrugged and went back to my paper. "I'll
help. I'll have plenty of time. I'm dropping out
of
school this afternoon. Right after the teacher
gets done laughing at this paper."
"Topic
-
the use of rhetoric to obscure a lack
of content," Jake said.
I froze. I looked up. "That's brilliant!
It means
the same as "the use of total bull"
...
but it sounds so much better!"
"Eat your Goo. I gotta go."
He left and I saw him head over to the spot
where Cassie was sitting.
It's one of our rules. We can never start look
ing like a "group." In school or in public
places,
we keep our distance. We only reveal the
relationships that already existed before we became
Animorphs.
I happened to see Chapman coming in through the door of the
cafeteria. He grabbed some kid who was running and
told him to slow down. Then he gazed around the
room, looking for troublemakers, like any normal
vice principal would.
 But Chapman isn't normal. Chapman is a
Controller. The Yeerk in his head is high-ranking
enough to speak directly with Visser Three.
 For about a second, Chapman's eyes locked
on mine.
 It was nothing. But it sent a shiver up my spine.
 Chapman runs The Sharing. The flyers that Erek
had been handing out at the concert had been about The
Sharing.
 Erek had never been some major friend of mine. He
was just this kid I'd say hi to in the hallway.
Except that he had been there for my mother's funeral.
 A funeral without a body.
 Some other kids from school had come, so I
didn't think anything much about it. Still, it was a nice
thing for him to do.
 And now he was working for The Sharing.
 The Sharing is a front organization for
Controllers. On the surface, it's a sort of
club. Kids join it and go on camp-outs and
field trips and stuff. Adults join it and
supposedly do business deals together and take
weekends at ski resorts.
And probably most members of The Sharing never even
know what's really going on. But the Controllers who
run The Sharing are always on the lookout for some
person with problems.
 See, the Yeerks don't just spread by forcing themselves
on people. A lot of people become Controllers by choice.
I guess they want to feel like they're part of something
bigger. Or maybe it's the secrecy they think is
cool. I don't know.
 All I know is that the Yeerks would rather have a
voluntary host. They'd rather have you surrender
your mind than have to take it by force.
 They work you up slowly through the levels of The
Sharing, till they decide you're ready. Then they
make promises and tell you lies, and the next thing
you know, you're a slave inside your own mind, all
the more easily controlled because you
let
it happen.
 I shoved the tray away from me and picked up my
pencil again. I stared down at the paper. But I was
seeing a funeral service. Singing. Flowers. Some
priest talking about how great my mother had been. He
hadn't even known my mother.
 I remember turning around in my pew to look at
the church. A lot of people had come. A lot of sad
faces. A lot of tears. Most people just looking
solemn because that's the way you had to look at a
funeral.
 Erek had been three rows back. He was wearing
a suit that was probably scratchy and
uncomfortable. But he didn't look solemn. He
looked angry. And he was shaking his head slowly,
barely, from side to side, as if he was
unconsciously disagreeing with everything the priest said.
 At the time I figured he was mad because
he had to dress up. I understood that.
 And now Erek had reappeared. The boy who
didn't smell human. The boy who worked for The
Sharing.
 "Well, Erek," I muttered under my breath,
"we'll have to see about you. We will definitely have
to see."
 I here may be something in this world cooler than flying
on your own wings, but I can't imagine what it is.
 Rollerblading? Hah! Surfing? Big deal.
Skydiving? Closer, but not halfway to actual
flying.
 Nothing is as cool as flying.
 It was after school that same day. I'd finished the
English paper exactly nine seconds before the
teacher came around to collect it. Then I'd gone
to history and been assigned another paper. That's the
nature of school: It never really ends.
 But finally the bell rang and blessed freedom! I
was outta there and looking for a private place
to morph. I wanted to check up on Erek.
Remembering the funeral and all had made it seem
even
more important, although I wasn't sure I
knew why.
 I climbed up onto the roof of the gym. Of
course, no one is supposed to go up there, but hey,
it was for a good reason. I morphed into an osprey.
It's a bird, a kind of hawk that usually lives
right near the water.
 I spread my broad wings and I flew away from
school.
 Tell me you haven't sat there in some boring
class, while some teacher went on and on (and on and
on) about how x equaled y but only if you
multiplied it by pi, and wished you could just fly right out
the window. Zoom! Good-bye!
 Well, I can't fly right out of class because if
I morphed in class there would be a lot of screaming
and hysteria. But I can come close to doing it.
 Kids were still piling onto the buses as I caught
a nice little headwind and used it to go airborne. I
zoomed high above all the kids heading for their
buses, and all the teachers heading for their cars. People were
just ovals of black, brown, blond, and red hair
to me. That's mostly what a person looks like from a
hundred feet up. A hair oval.
 I have never felt as totally alive as when I'm
in a hawk morph. Tobias doesn't have
it all that bad, in some ways. There are so many
worse animals to be.
I felt a thermal, a pillar of warm air,
billow up
beneath my wings and I went for it. Zoom! Like riding
an elevator to the top floor! Up and up. The
warm
air
currents swept me higher and higher.
Yah-Hah!
Now the hair ovals were just dots, and the buses were
bright yellow toys pulling slowly away
from the school.
But even from five hundred feet up in the air,
as high as a fifty-story building, I could still see
faces behind the school bus windows. With the osprey's
eyes, it's like wearing binoculars.
I floated up there, wings spread wide, my tail
fanned out to catch every bit of lift, my talons
tucked back against the underside of my body.
Air
rushed over the leading edge of my wings,
making a slight fluttering sound. Wind flowed
over my streamlined head, and I kept my hooked
beak pointed forward to maintain every ounce of
momentum.
I rode that thermal as high as it would carry me.
I'd learned that from Tobias. See, the thermal
will
give you altitude for almost no effort,
and you can turn that altitude into distance. It's like
soaring to the top of a mountain, then skiing
down the slopes in whatever direction you want
to go.
Still, it did eventually require some hard
wing-flapping to get to Erek's neighborhood.
I spotted Tobias from far off, when he would
have been invisible to any human eye. He was
riding the wind, just like me. Maybe with a little
more style, since he'd had so much more experi
ence.
When I got close to enough to try thoughtspeak,
I called to him.
Tobias? Can you hear me?
I can hear you and see you, Marco. I've
been
watching you for twenty minutes.
No way. I just spotted you.
You have to know what to look for,
Marco. By the way . . . when I count to three, you
need to
bank a very sharp, very fast left turn.
Turn? Why?
Just do it! One. Two.
THREE!
I raised one wing, lowered the other, skewed
my tail, and cut a sudden, sharp left.
FWOOOOM!
Aaaahhhhh!
A missile blew past me, doing what seemed
like a thousand miles an hour! Only it wasn't coming
from the ground upward, it had fallen
from the sky down! And this missile had gray
feathers.
The wind from its passing nearly knocked me off
balance. It was half a mile away, down and
south, by the time I could even try to think about
focusing.
I saw swept-back, slate-gray wings and a
tight
tail. It was diving away from me so fast it made
me look like I was standing still.
What the
...
What was
thatl backslash
I yelled.
Heh, heh, hen. Welcome to my
world. To
bias said. That's a peregrine
falcon. You know, like Jake's morph. They
usually prefer to knock off a tasty pigeon or the
occasional duck. It must
have been the way you were flying. He probably
thought you were a big old clumsy duck.
Jeez. What did I ever do to make
him mad?
Shake it off. Tobias
advised. He missed,
right? I know that bird. He's not as good as he thinks
he is. He's taken a shot at me before. He
must be hungry.
Suddenly flying didn't seem nearly as fun.
Yeah. I'll shake it off. That should be
easy,
since I'll be shaking for at least another hour.
lt's not all just about riding
thermals. To
bias said dryly. Come on, you want
to see our
boy Erek?
I moved closer to Tobias. Much closer. This was
his world up here in the air. He knew what he
was doing. By the way,
thanks. I said.
Always remember to look
up. Tobias advised. The
danger is usually above you. But on a
lighter note . . . that's Erek right there. He
walks
home from his school. See him? Coming to the
corner?
I spotted the oval of hair below me. Yeah, I
see him.
I watched him this morning on his way in.
I watched him play soccer during gym
-
They play soccer? They play soccer
during gym? Man, we never get to play soccer.
Now he's heading home. I'm
going to let you
take over because I am hungry. And I am also
bored with looking at the top of his head.
Did he do anything weird or
different?
He scored a goal in soccer. Does
that
count?
Hey. Look. I had
noticed three guys closing in behind Erek. Something
in the way they moved caught my attention. From high
up, it looked almost as if they were hunting Erek.
Hmmm. That's not good.
Tobias said.
We both spilled air from our wings and dived,
wanting a closer look. I could see the face of
one
of the guys behind Erek. It was an expression I
had seen before: the idiot, giggling sneer of a
bully.
Suddenly, the guys raced forward. Erek spotted
them and started to run.
It was a street on the edge of a development. There
was a lot of traffic to Erek's left and a stone
wall to his right. The stone wall ended about
fifty
yards away, where it opened for the entrance to
the subdivision.
lf this guy is a Controller, these
punks are making a serious mistake.
I said. They may get him today, but they
might regret it later.
 Maybe I'll just give that one jerk
a little talon haircut. Tobias said.
 Tobias hates bullies. Back when he was
human, he was the kid most likely to be pounded
on. Jake met Tobias when Tobias's head was
just about to be flushed in the toilet. Naturally,
Jake helped him.
 Tobias, I don't think
com I started to say, but it was too late.
Tobias was in a stoop and aiming for the biggest guy's
head.
 It all happened in a flash.
 Erek ran. He tripped. He sprawled
forward, out into the street. He slammed into the broad
side of a passing bus.
 WHAM! I could hear the impact from up in the
air.
 And then . . .
 And then ... for just a second, Erek wasn't there
anymore. Something else was where he had been.
 Something that seemed to be made of patches of steel
and milk-white plastic.
 Then, in the next split second, Erek was
back. A normal boy, lying winded on the
sidewalk.
 The bullies ran off. The bus driver never
even noticed and drove on.
Tobias opened his wings and nearly stopped in
midair.
 Did you see t? Tobias
asked.
 Yeah. I sure did.
 What was t?
 I don't know. I said.
But 1 know what it
wasn't.
It wasn't human.
We need to talk to Ax. I
said to Tobias.
 Definitely. That was not human. That
was seriously not human.
 So you did see it, right? I'm not
crazy?
 Yes, you're crazy. But I
did see it. Tobias said. Very
weird.
 Below us, Erek climbed up off the sidewalk,
dusted himself off like nothing had happened, and resumed
walking toward home.
 Hang a right. Tobias
said. We'll get some good updrafts
off the road. Whatever your friend Erek is, I
don't think he's from around here.
 We flew hard and fast toward home. Tobias
split off to round up Ax. I demorphed and headed
home to check in with my dad and let him know I still
existed. Then I called Jake.
I got Tom instead.
 "Hey, Tom. Is Jake around there?"
 "I don't know. JAKE!" he yelled. "He
said he's coming."
 "Cool."
 "Haven't seen you around here much," Tom said.
"Keeping busy?"
 I felt a little chill. It's weird, talking
to Controllers when you know that's what they are. It was
Tom's voice, and it acted like Tom, but it
wasn't Tom. Tom was cowering helplessly in a
corner of his own mind.
 I was talking to a Yeerk.
 "Yeah, I guess so," I said.
 "Uh-huh. We're going up to the lake, do some
waterskiing."
 "You and Jake?"
 "Yeah, right. No, me and The Sharing. You know
Jake's too much of a social misfit to join,"
Tom said with a totally human, big-brother laugh of
derision. "It's just that we have too many girls going
and not enough guys."
 A lie, of course. A lie that was supposed
to entice me. Why was Tom suddenly trying to get
me interested in The Sharing again? He quickly gave me
the answer.
 "S. I heard your dad was back at work. That's
cool."
 "Yeah, I guess so," I said. My father had
gone
through a bad time after my mom "died." Now he was
back at work. He's an engineer, but he's
heavily involved in computers, too. He had been
working with the new observatory on ways to design
software that would aim the telescopes bet
ter.
He was also working on some projects he
couldn't even talk about. Projects I figured
must involve the military.
"You could bring your dad," Tom said as ca
sually as he could. "I mean, not like anyone wants
their fathers along, usually, right? But I
mean, maybe he's ready to get back out there in the
world and all. The Sharing is a good place to make
business connections, you know?"
"Yeah, I'll ask him," I said.
"Do that, okay? Your dad could probably use some
down time to relax, take it easy, meet some
people."
S. They were after my father now. I felt something
burning inside me, like I'd taken a gulp of
lava. I wanted to reach right through the
phone and take a baseball bat to the evil
creature
in Tom's head.
"Here's Jake," Tom said. There was a scuffling
sound as he handed the phone off. Then
Jake's voice.
"Hey, Marco. What's up?"
I went off. "What's up?! What's
up?
Those
scumbags are after my father, that's what's up!
How do you live with that? How do you look at
that piece of crap every day? He's all like, "Bring
your dad to The Sharing, do a father-son bonding thing, and
oh, by the way, would you mind if we
stuck a
-
?"
"Shut up," Jake hissed.
I shut up. But my hand was squeezing the receiver so
hard I could have snapped it. Jake let
me calm down for a minute. He made "uh-huh"
noises in the phone, like he was listening to me
talking. He made a couple of laughing sounds. I
guess Tom wasn't far away from the phone.
I knew Jake was right. We don't talk
secrets
over the phone. There's no way of knowing who
might be listening in.
"Okay, I'm cool," I said. I wasn't
cool, but I
was under control again.
"That sounds good to me," Jake said, still
pretending to have a conversation.
"We have to get together," I said. "It's a nice
day out."
That was the signal that we should meet in
the woods.
"Okay. Later," Jake said casually.
He hung up.
I took a couple of deep breaths. Then I
took a
couple more.
The Yeerks had taken my mother. They weren't
getting my father. Before that happened I'd tell him
everything. Before I'd let that happen I'd take
Tom down, no matter what Jake said.
 I'd take Tom, I'd take Chapman,
I'd take every Controller I knew of before I'd
let them have my father. I had power. Deadly
animals lived inside me. Their DNA swam with
my own.
 I could feel the rage flowing through me, the blind,
violent rage that became little films in my head --
little head-movies of revenge and destruction. I
pictured the things I would do to Tom ... to Chapman
. . . someday even to Visser Three. I would do
terrible things to them. Terrible, violent things.
 It was a sick feeling. It was sick, and I
knew it, and yet I ran those images over and over
in my head.
 Rage is addictive, you know. I guess it's
sorta like a drug. Anger and hatred get you high.
They get you high, but like any addiction, they hollow
you out and tear you down and eat you alive.
 I guess I knew all that. But all I could
think of was that they were
not
getting my father.
 So I ran the scenes of violence over and over in
my head. I rode that rush of fury till at last
it burned itself out and left me feeling empty and
beaten.
-L hooked up with Jake and the two of us
rode our bikes to Cassie's farm. He didn't
say anything about my conversation with Tom. Jake
knew how I felt. We've all felt it before.
From Cassie's farm we walked across the
fields to the edge of the forest. There's a place we
meet there, deep enough in the trees that no
one is likely to see us.
Rachel and Cassie were already there. Cassie
was on her knees in the pine needles, looking into a
burrow hole. I have no idea what was in
there, but she seemed fascinated. Rachel was
sitting on a fallen log.
"Tobias is off finding Ax," Rachel said as we
approached.
"I think there are three of them," Cassie said. I
guess she was talking about whatever was in that burrow.
 "So? What's the big panic?" Rachel asked.
 Before Jake or I could answer, I heard something
crashing through the brush.
 He leaped into view, sailing over the log
Rachel was sitting on.
Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill.
 "Hey, Ax," I said. "Very dramatic
entrance."
 Of course, any appearance by Ax was going to be
dramatic. Ax is an Andalite. The only
Andalite to survive when their Dome ship was
destroyed by the Yeerks in high orbit. He's an
alien.
 You know how on
Star Trek
the aliens are always just humans with a little nose putty
and some bad outfits? But they basically
look human and act human and speak English?
 Well, Ax isn't like that. You take one look
at Ax and you know he isn't from around here.
 Picture a sort of big, blue-and-tan deer.
Only instead of a deer neck and head, you have a
semi-human chest with two weak arms, topped by a
head that is definitely unusual. Ax has no
mouth and four eyes. Two of his eyes are in the
usual location, but his other two eyes are mounted on
stalks on top of his head. The stalk eyes can aim
totally independently. Ax can look right at you with his
two main eyes, and still be looking behind
him with one stalk and off to the right with
his other stalk.
It's kind of unsettling, till you get used to it.
But not nearly as unsettling as his tail. The tail
makes you think scorpion. It curves up and
over, so that the razor-sharp blade-tip is usually
poised somewhere above his sloping shoulders.
That tail is fast and dangerous. Very fast, very
dangerous. Basically, Ax could slice-and-dice a
human into bite-sized chunks in about two
seconds.
 Fortunately, Ax is on our side.
Hello, Prince Jake.
Hello Marco, Rachel.
Cassie? Did you lose something?
Cassie stood up. Then, as an afterthought,
she brushed off her knees. "Baby opossums,"
she said, by way of explanation. "Too big for the
pouch, not ready to leave the den."
"Don't tell Tobias," I said. "He'll
eat "em."
I already know about them. Tobias
said.
I looked up in surprise. He was in the tree
above me. I hadn't heard him arrive.
Cassie shrugged. "Tobias is a hawk. He
has a right to be a hawk." Then she looked up at
Tobias
and smiled. "Of course, they are awfully cute."
0h, man. Tobias
groaned. 0kay, okay, this
litter is off-limits. Happy now?
"You're a sweetheart, Tobias," Cassie
said.
We should move while we
talk. Tobias suggested. There are some kids playing soldier just about three
hundred yards west. Let's stay well out
of range.
 We all started walking east, and Tobias went
up again to scout ahead for any danger.
 "Okay, Marco," Jake said after a few
minutes. "This is your party. What's up?"
 I told them all what Tobias and I had
seen. Tobias came back and added some details.
Then I looked to Ax.
 "So, Ax, you're the official alien. What
does this sound like to you?"
 Ax turned his head toward me, making eye
contact with his main eyes. Marco?
Something has happened to your hair. I believe it
has become shorter. Are you suffering from some sort of
illness?
 "That does it!" I yelled, as the others all
broke up giggling. "It'll grow out, all right?
It'll grow out. Besides, it's easier to take care
of. Man! I make one little change!"
 Have I said something
wrong? Ax wondered.
 "No," Jake assured him. "Not at all.
Marco is just a little sensitive. Go ahead, Ax.
What do you think about this Erek person?"
 I do not know. It ... it
doesn't sound like any species I know of.
"What? Dude, you're the expert on aliens," I
pointed out.
Marco, even we Andalites don't know
every species in the galaxy.
I swear he sounded embarrassed. Although since he
was using thought-speak, maybe
"sounded" isn't the right word.
"You don't recognize the description?" Jake
asked.
No.
"The way you guys describe it, it sounds more
like a robot or something," Rachel ventured.
"But how does it pass for human?"
0h, that is technologically
possible. Ax
said, relieved to be able to add something to
our speculation. lt's probably a
holographic projection. Like your primitive
TV, only threedimensional.
"Primitive
TV? Hey, we have cable at my
house," I said. Ax didn't think it was
funny, but
Cassie smiled.
Tobias swooped low over our heads and came
to rest on a branch. So when Erek
gets hit by
the bus, he drops the hologram for just a split
second.
The power supply may have been inter
rupted or overloaded. Ax suggested.
But that's
the interesting question: What power supply? It
would take a great deal of power to maintain such a
hologram, hour after hour, day after day.
"Hey, maybe Erek is nuclear-powered," I
said.
Ax laughed. Then I guess he realized I
wasn't
joking. I don't think nuclear power is
likely. he
said, still sort of giggling like I was the primitive
moron of the universe. I think it would
take something much more advanced.
"Is there any way to see through this holo
gram?" Cassie asked.
"We could hit him with something as big as a
bus," Rachel suggested.
"Now, there's a classic Rachel suggestion," I
said with a laugh. I was feeling better, hanging
with my friends.
"Marco found out The Sharing is having a lit
tle waterskiing thing up at the lake," Jake said.
He bit his lip and added, "Tom told him. Erek
is
in The Sharing. He'll probably be there, too.
Per
fect chance for us to get a good look at him.
That's the 'where." Now we just need the "how.""
Ax thought for a moment as we ambled
through the woods. The hologram is meant
to
trick humans. It would be tuned for
human
sight.
Hawk eyes are better than human, but still see
similar wavelengths of light. Maybe a totally
dif
ferent sort of vision would be able to penetrate the
hologram.
My heart sank. I knew what was coming next.
Some gross morph.
 "Unusual vision is our specialty,"
Rachel said with a careless laugh. She slapped me
on the back like life was just one big adventure.
 Sometimes Rachel really grinds my nerves.
 "No bugs, okay?" I said. "All I'm
saying is, no more insect morphs. Is that too much
to ask?"
J. guess it
was
too much to ask, as I found
out a couple days later.
"What do you mean, we're going to draw straws?"
I asked suspiciously.
"To see who morphs our new morph," Rachel
said. "Ax is in, regardless. We need his
expertise in aliens. One of us has to go in with
him."
"What's the morph?" I asked suspiciously.
"Spider," Cassie said.
We were at Cassie's barn. It was Saturday
morning. On Friday I'd found out I'd gotten
a B
on my English paper. How cool is that? I'd
stayed up watching TV with my dad and been late for
this meeting.
This was the kind of insanity they cooked up
when I wasn't there.
"Excuse me? I must have something wrong with my
ears." I tapped the side of my head with
my palm. "Because, see, I thought I heard you
say the word "spider." And I remember saying
"no
insects.""
Cassie held her hand out to me. And in that
hand was a spider. "It's not an insect. Arachnids
have eight legs and two body segments. Insects have
six legs and three segments."
I swear, I took a look at that spider and almost
passed out.
"Since I knew we were doing this today, I decided
to do some reading. This is a wolf spider. It has
pretty good eyesight. In fact, it has eight
eyes."
Cassie said this like having eight eyes was a
good thing. Like eight eyes was something everyone should
want.
"Go away, Cassie. Go away. Go away, go
away,
I am
going to morph a spider!
You
can morph
a spider. I don't like spiders."
Jake gave me a look. "Marco, Cassie
always
gets stuck doing the new morphs. Besides, this is more
your mission than anyone else's."
"What? Why?" I demanded angrily. "Why is this
my mission more than yours or Rachel's?"
Jake shrugged. "Erek is your friend."
"My friend? When did I ever say he was my friend?
He's not my friend. I barely know the guy!"
 "Marco, you're such a wuss," Rachel said.
 "Hey,
you
want to be a spider?"
 Rachel shuddered slightly. "Sure." She was
lying. I just knew it. "If I draw the short
straw, I'd love to go spider."
 Then she grinned. She couldn't keep a straight
face.
 "Look, you don't
have
to do this," Jake said. "It's just that we're
going to be infiltrating a meeting of The Sharing. The
Yeerks are totally on alert for animal morphs.
We have to fit into the environment of the lake. Whatever
morphs we use have to belong there. We can't be showing
up there as lions and tigers and bears."
 "Oh, my," Cassie interjected.
 "We need good vision, but not standard mammal-type
eyes. And we can't all go in the same way. I
want two people to hang back as a rescue squad in
case we get into a mess. Ax has to go because we
need him to see if he can figure out what Erek
is. Ax is going in as a spider, and we need
someone to go with him."
 "Has anyone told Ax about this?"
 "He was here earlier. While you were sleeping in
late. He said he thought a spider's body was much
more sensible than a human's body,"
Cassie said. "His exact words were, "Ah,
good. With eight legs it won't fall over like a
human.""
 "Be glad we waited for you at all," Rachel
growled. "Just draw a straw."
 Jake had five pieces of hay in his fist.
There was no way to tell which was the shortest one.
 "Hah. I know how to beat this," I said.
"It's mathematical. If I choose first, my
odds are just one in five. The next person to choose
has odds of one in four, then one in three, and so
on. So the safest thing to do is choose first."
 I took a deep breath, reached out, and yanked
up a straw.
 I took another deep breath and looked at the very
short straw. "Really, it made perfect sense
mathematically," I said.
 I felt like crying.
 Rachel rolled her eyes. "You know, if you're
going to be a big baby, I'll do it."
 I should have just said "okay." That's what I should have
said. What I
did say
to Rachel was, "Don't condescend to me, oh
mighty
Xena.
Just because I'm not a reckless idiot doesn't mean
I'm a wuss. I've never chickened out on a
morph yet. And if Ax is in, so am I. You
can hang around and be the backup, Rachel. I'm
going where the action is."
 To which Rachel replied with a very calm, "Okay."
See, this is why guys and girls should not be
in combat together. Because it's much harder for a guy to be a
coward when some girl is watching. Especially when
she's all gung ho. If it had just been Jake and
Tobias, I'd have been weeping and groveling on the
ground.
 Cassie held out the spider. "It's not bad,"
she said. "I morphed the spider yesterday, just to see
what it was like.
Charlotte's Web
was one of my favorite books."
 "It would be," I muttered. Well, that was the
clincher. Rachel was ready to go, and Cassie had
already done it.
 I reached out a finger to touch the spider. It was
shaking. My finger, not the spider.
 I touched the spider's back. It tried to get
away but Cassie closed her hand around the spider
and the tip of my finger.
 The spider became very still as I acquired it.
Thanks to the Andalite technology that had
transformed me, the spider DNA entered my
system.
 Maybe the Yeerks were right. Maybe the
An-dalites were just the big meddlers of the universe.
I know one thing: At that moment, as I touched
the spider's bristly body, I really wished the
Andalites had found someone else to give this power
to.
 lake is in the mountains. It's a long way from
where any of us live. And if we'd had to walk it
would have taken several days. Fortunately, we
didn't have to walk.
 We have our own little airline. TWA: Travel
With Animorphs.
 It was a beautiful day. Just a few puffy clouds
in a blue sky. Bright sun. A canopy of
trees spread out beneath us as we flew toward the
mountains.
 With my osprey wings spread wide and the sun
toasting the ground so it sent up elevators of warm
air, it was as perfect as life can get.
 If you overlooked the fact that we were heading
toward utter, unspeakable grossness and certain
destruction.
 Time to split up.
Tobias said. The lake is just over that
next ridge.
 We had not been flying close together because that would have
looked massively suspicious. Two
ospreys, a harrier, a bald eagle, a
peregrine, and a red-tailed hawk, all flying together?
Not in the natural world. But we were all within a mile
of each other, and all heading in the same direction.
 Tobias went into a lazy upward spiral,
hanging back. Rachel and Cassie split off,
too. The Yeerks would have heavy security around the
meeting of The Sharing. The Yeerks know all about
morph-+. They would be on alert.
 Ax, in a harrier morph, Jake, in his
peregrine falcon morph, and I flew on toward
the lake, though still far apart.
 You know, one of your kind tried
to kill me the other day. I said to Jake.
 Tobias told me.
Jake said. Gotta watch out.
Falcons rule.
 Yeah, well I noticed he
didn't try it a second time.
 Don't diss falcons.
Jake said.
 0ne-on-one in a fair fight, an
osprey would kick your butt.
As if. Jake sneered.
 Excuse me. Ax
interrupted. ls there some special meaning
to this conversation that I don't understand?
 Yeah. I said. The meaning is that Jake and I are scared, so we're
babbling in a desperate effort not to think about it.
 Ah. I am frightened, too. I
don't really like morphing tiny animals. I keep
thinking about all the rest of my mass.
 Your what? I asked, not
really caring. I was focused on the morphing ahead.
 My mass. When you morph something
smaller than yourself, your body mass must go somewhere.
So it goes into Zero-space. Zero-space is the
space that ships travel through when they are going faster
than light. It's not very likely to happen, but
sometimes a ship traveling in Z-space will
intersect with a temporarily parked mass.
 This got my total, complete attention.
 Wait a minute. Are you telling me
that when we get small, all the leftover . . .
stuff ... all the extra flesh and guts and bones
go bulging into Zero-space like some big balloon of
human tis-sue?
 0f course. Where did you think all
the mass went?
 I shuddered. I really didn't think
about it.
Jake was no more thrilled than I was. So right now there's a big bag of Jake
floating
in Zero-space? And it's possible some spaceship
will zoom along and hit it and splatter it all
over?
 No, no, of course n.
Ax said.
 I breathed a huge sigh of relief. Too
soon, it turned out.
 0f course no ship would actually
hit a
floating mass. Ax said, talking to us like
we were nitwits. The ship's shielding
systems would disintegrate the mass. That's what
troubles me about doing small morphs. It very
seldom happens. The odds are millions to one.
But it
could
happen.
 Jake and I thought about this for a while. About a
spaceship "disintegrating" some big wad of
our mass. It was not a pretty picture.
 Hey, Ax? Jake said.
You know how we wanted you to be honest with
us? To tell us everything you know?
 Yes, Prince Jake.
 Small change. In the future,
don't tell us things that will scare us silly just as
we're going into possible battle.
 A big wad of Marco in
Zero-space. I muttered. Like hanging your butt out of a car window, waiting
for a truck to come along and sideswipe it off.
Just at that moment, I topped the crest of the ridge.
Tall pines nearly scraped my belly. And there,
spread out before me, sparkling in the sun, was a large
lake nestled between the surrounding hills and mountains.
 0kay, boys. Jake
said. This is where I peel off. Just
one final word. I know spiders eat bugs, so do
not, I repeat, do
not,
eat any flies. I'll have enough to worry about in fly
morph.
 Remind me again.
I said. Why are we doing this instead of
staying home and sleeping in late?
 We're saving the world.
Jake said.
 0h, yeah. Great. My mass is
hanging out in the Zero-space highway and I'm about
to become Spiderman. I knew there had to be a
pretty good reason.
here were probably two hundred people around the lake below
us -- boys, girls, older people. Some were swimming.
Some were water-skiing. Some were grilling burgers and
hot dogs over charcoal fires. A lot were just
milling around and talking and laughing.
 You'd swear it was some kind of big community
picnic. From the air they all looked so normal.
And probably most of the people below us were normal. But a
lot of them were Controllers. And one of them was Erek,
who was certainly not normal.
 We stayed well back from the lakeshore and
dropped down into the trees. We came to rest on the
ground, inside a cluster of tall bushes.
My osprey vision and osprey hearing had revealed
no one within a hundred yards. But I was tingling with
nervousness, just the same.
 Shall we
demorph? Ax asked.
 Not yet. Tobias said he would
swing back over, once we were on the ground.
 So we waited there, looking a bit weird, two
birds of prey just hanging out inside a bunch of
bushes at the edge of the forest. I could hear the whine of
power boats out on the water, and closer, little
snatches of human laughter.
 0kay, guys.
Tobias's thought-speak voice suddenly spoke in
my head. Looks clear to me. You've
got a guy and a girl maybe a hundred yards
off. But I think they're making out, so they should be
busy for a while.
 I quickly began to demorph. One of the limitations
on morphing is that you can't just morph straight from one
form to another. You always have to return to your own body
in between.
 In Ax's case this meant returning to his
An-dalite form. That had to make him nervous. There
were dozens of Controllers just a few hundred feet
away. Yeerks might overlook one kid sneaking
around. They wouldn't overlook an An-dalite.
 Are you ready to morph
again? Ax asked me, once we were back
in our normal bodies.
"I'll
neverbe
ready to morph a spider," I said. My teeth were
chattering, and it wasn't cold.
 I have to morph. Ax said.
I can't stay here in Andalite form.
 "Yeah, yeah, I know. I know. Okay.
Okay, I'm going to do this. But I'm going to keep
my eyes closed."
 I focused my mind on the spider. But I lost
concentration, mostly because even the image of that wolf
spider grossed me out. Then Ax started to change.
I knew still couldn't just stand there and watch. I knew
I had to morph.
 "It can't be any worse than morphing a fly,
right? Or an ant?" I asked no one. Not that I
wanted to think about the ant morph. We'd had a very,
very,
very
bad time in ant morph.
 I closed my eyes and focused again. This time I
kept my concentration.
 I felt myself starting to shrink. Shrinking is always
a little weird, but now I was also thinking about some big,
disgusting balloon of Marco mass suddenly bulging
out into Zero-space.
 Whatever Zero-space was.
 I could feel myself getting smaller. I could
feel very strange things happening inside me: sudden
feelings of emptiness where organs were simply
disappearing.
 And there was a distracting squishy sound that came up
my spine and through my skull.
The sound of bones turning to marrow, and of marrow sort
of oozing away.
 I wouldn't be needing any bones, I guess.
 I kept my eyes tightly shut, not wanting
to see what was happening. And I held on to my
fears with a death grip of determination. I mean, if
there's anything worse than being a spider, it's being
some disgusting mix of half human, half spider.
 But then . . .
 POP! POP! POP!
 I could see! I tried to close my eyes, but
no! I didn't have eyelids. It's very hard
to close your eyes when you don't have eyelids.
 Eyes were popping open in my forehead.
Eyes were erupting out of my head like zits.
 I almost lost it right then. I would have screamed if
I'd had a voice any longer. But I was already
half spider. And I was staring at Ax as he
underwent a change very similar to my own.
 I was watching him with vision that was half human and
half the shattered, broken-mirror vision of the
spider's compound eyes.
 Something horrifying was growing from the place on
Ax's face where a mouth should have been. Something huge
and bulging and foul. Two monstrous, swollen things
like . . . like nothing I'd ever seen before. They were
jaws, but huge and
outsized. From the end of each one, a wicked, curved
fang grew.
 Sometimes you really, really need eyelids. There
are definitely some things you don't want to have
to see.
 I knew the same thing was happening to me. My
bulging jaw parts grew till they entered my own
distorted field of vision.
 Fortunately, I didn't have to worry too long
about the jaws. See, I became distracted when
legs suddenly exploded from my chest.
 SPROOOT!
 Four new legs, two on each side, just shot
out of me, like I was a tube of toothpaste someone had
stomped. They sprouted all Gumby-unformed, then
began to form joints. Way too many joints.
 My human legs and arms were changing to match these
first spider legs. I fell forward, no longer able
to stand erect.
 It wasn't much of a fall. I was already pretty
small. The pine needles beneath me already seemed to be
as big around as a human finger.
 Not that I had any fingers left to compare with.
 All the while, new eyes kept opening suddenly
where eyes absolutely did not belong. Some were
compound eyes. Some weren't.
 Then, as if the extra legs, and the mix "n"
match eyes, and the huge jaw-and-fang combo weren't
enough, some new leglike things came sprouting out of
my ... well, out of where my neck used to be. They
were like extra legs, only they weren't. I had no
idea what they were. But they moved. Much later,
I found out they're called
pedipalps.
A sort of cross between a mouth part and a leg.
 My head was swelling, compared to the rest of my
body. It was gigantic ... in a small
way. My entire body was now divided into two
big chunks: a sort of bulging head and an even
bulgier body.
 I was almost entirely spider now. The pine
needles that had seemed as big as fingers were now as
big as two-by-fours.
 As the last touch, strangely soft hairs began
to grow from everywhere on my body.
 It was the hair that seemed to trigger the awakening of the
spider brain.
 The wolf spider has good eyes for a spider. But
it's all the thousands of tiny hairs that really get the
spider brain's attention. They sense every subtle
clue in the wind. Every minor movement in every
direction.
 And all of a sudden it felt like the whole world was
moving: leaves, pine needles, the dirt beneath my
claw-tipped eight legs, bugs in the dirt,
moles under the ground, birds in the air.
All of it seemed to be hardwired into the hairs that
covered my spider body.
 With all that sensory overload, the spider brain
woke up. I had been afraid it would be like the
brain of an ant: a mindless machine. Or that it would
be the terrified, fearful, panic-stricken
mind of a prey animal.
 But oh, no. Definitely no.
 They didn't call it a wolf spider for nothing.
 This guy was tiny, no more than two inches from the end
of one outstretched leg to the end of the farthest back
leg. A toddler could easily crush him underfoot.
 But I guess it isn't size alone that makes
a predator, because as soon as I felt the edge of that
spider brain I knew this boy was trouble.
 The wolf spider was a killer.
 Hunger.
 That was pretty much what the spider mind had
to say: hunger, it was hungry. It wanted to hunt.
It wanted to kill. It wanted to eat up a few
nice juicy bugs. It was hungry.
 Did I mention hunger?
 And it didn't care what kind of bug. Could be
beetles, could be grasshoppers, could be
crickets, could be a big mean mantis. The
spider didn't care. It ruled the world of bugs.
It was to bugs what a lion is to a herd of
antelopes. It was a shark among guppies.
 They could run from the wolf spider, but they couldn't
hide.
 Motion! Something moved, left to right across
my field of vision, and I was after it like a dog af
ter a rabbit.
Eight legs powered up and I blew across the
forest floor like a drag racer firing out of the start
ing gate.
The world was weird to my eight spider eyes. I
saw colors no human ever saw. It was like when
you mess with the color and tint knobs on the TV.
Things that should have been brown were blue,
and green was red, or whatever. From some an
gles the pictures were almost clear, but a second
later everything would shatter into bits and I'd be
watching a million tiny monitors at once.
I never could make logical sense out of it.
But mostly what I saw was movement. I was very, very
interested in movement. My eyes and
every hair on my disgusting little body were about
spotting movement.
And when the right thing moved, my body just
answered all on its own.
It was a rush, as they used to say in my dad's
day. A charge. It was like tapping into the main
pipe of adrenaline. It was electric. It was
nuclear.
I blew across pine needles and fallen leaves and
over patches of dirt and I kept that moving bug in
my field of vision and I knew what I was doing,
I mean, I knew I was Marco, a human in
morph,
and I knew I didn't really want to eat that
racing
bug, but man, I was too jazzed to stop.
The prey was running and I was the predator. I had
evolved for hundreds of millions of years to do
exactly this. When Tyrannosaurus rex was still
millions of years away from even thinking about
evolving, tiny arachnid hunters were killing and
eating. The entire history of Homo sapiens from
caveman to soccer mom was a blip in the history of
spiders.
 I was death on eight legs.
 It was a beetle. That's what I was chasing. A
big old beetle, much larger than I was.
Larger and slower. He grew in my distorted field
of vision. He grew and grew and I powered on.
 I wish I could explain why I kept on with the
hunt. Sometimes the animal brain takes over for a
while and sort of overwhelms the human mind. But
that's not what was happening to me. I wasn't
overwhelmed. I was just into it.
 A last burst of speed!
 My front legs touched the beetle. He
dodged left, but too slow.
 I clambered right up on his back.
 I positioned my jaws with their deadly fangs, and
-
 Marco. What are you doing?
 It was Ax. I scampered down off the beetle,
feeling like I'd been caught doing something wrong. The
beetle ran on, relieved to have escaped. If
beetles can feel relief.
Nothing. I was just letting the spider be a
spider. It was a pretty good answer,
I thought. I guess its instincts kind of
carried me away.
 Marco, I morphed the identical
spider. Ax said.
 I felt a wave of guilt and shame suddenly
swell up inside me. Ax, it was just a
cockroach. Who cares? Come on, we have a job
to do.
 Sometimes humans worry
me. Ax said.
 I didn't ask him what he meant.
Why had I gotten so into the hunt? Why hadn't I
resisted the urge?
 I flashed on the rage I'd felt when I
talked to Tom. Was that it?
 I think it's this way. Ax
said. He took the lead and I saw him moving in
front of me, a spider scurrying effortlessly on
his eight legs.
 I fell in behind him. I was calm now. The
incredible, insane rush of the chase was over. Now the
spider was just a tool I was using.
 Suddenly, from the sky . . . something fell toward
me!
 It landed right between Ax and me. A grasshopper,
three, four times our size. It looked like an
elephant.
 Then . . . thwap! It fired its huge hind
legs and shot into the air. It disappeared as quickly as
it had arrived.
 We raced on through the forest, covering the
two hundred feet between us and the edge of the party. I
sensed the nearness of humans. I "heard" vibrations
that might have been speech, but the voices were too
garbled to make any sense out of.
 Hey, Marco, Ax, you
guys around?
 It was Jake's thought-speak voice.
 Yes, Prince Jake.
Ax answered. We are here.
 We're not pretty, but we're
here. I added.
 Cool. I'm not exactly handsome
myself. I'm in fly morph. Haven't found our
boy Erek yet, though.
 Something massive and slow appeared in the air above
me. I scampered sideways. It landed slowly with a
loud WHOOOMPHHH!
 A human foot. A shoe. Nike.
 You know, I'd been worrying someone
might step on me. I said. But humans are so slow.
 Be careful anyway.
Jake said. let me know if you find
Erek.
 I don't know how I'm supposed
to recognize hm. I complained.
These spider eyes aren't good at seeing
distances. And human heads seem to be way up in the
clouds, from where I'm crawling down here.
 But Ax and I went on, skittering
swiftly through a forest of huge, slow-moving legs and
feet.
 Then, right in front of me, I saw it.
 It looked like a bare human foot. Except that
I
could see through the skin. Through the toenails. With my
eight strange, distorted spider eyes I could see
right through the electronic haze of the hologram.
 I could see what was beneath the hologram.
 I saw what looked like interlocking plates of
steel and ivory. The "foot" had no toes. In
fact, it wasn't shaped like a human foot. More like
a paw.
 It was not human. And everything in my tingling,
buzzing, hyper, spider's senses told me it was not
alive.
 Ax?
 Yes, I see it.
 What is x?
 I do not know.
 lt looks like a machine, almost. Like
it's made out of metal.
 Yes. Ax said.
I think your friend Erek may be an
android.
android?
Yes. A robot. A machine made
to seem like a
life-form. Ax said, as though it was just the
most common idea in the world.
This is like something you know about,
Ax?
I asked, looking up at the thing called Erek.
This is not a type of android I
know. Ax
said. lt is not Andalite. I don't
think it is Yeerk.
I don't know who
...
or
what
...
it is.
My spider eyes could see the foot and most of the
way up the leg. It was like looking at a
double-exposure photograph. There was the out
ward appearance of a human leg and, way up
high, shorts. But beneath ail that there was this
machine made of what seemed like steel and ivory.
 It was thousands of interlocked plates,
almost like the chain mail armor knights used to wear.
Each of the individual links was roughly triangular
in shape. The "ivory" segments were a little larger
than the segments that looked like steel.
 The robot . . . android . . . whatever it
was, was smaller than the human Erek. The leg
I was looking at was oddly constructed. More like a
stretched-out dog leg than a human leg.
 The robot leg, along with its holographic
projection of a human foot, lifted off, as Erek
went on his way.
 Jake? I called.
 Yeah? Hey, I think I see our
guy. There's this person . . . it's hard with fly
senses, but I see this person who is kind of
shimmering all over, and it's like there's something hiding
underneath all the shimmering light.
 Yep. That's hm. I
confirmed.
 Wait a minute! There's another
one!
Whatl
 Another one of
them.
Jake answered. I just buzzed
right past him. There are two of these things.
 0kay, northings have gotten
com I started to say.
FWAP! FWAP! FWAP! FWAP!
 A hurricane of wind!
 The ground in front of me exploded as two big
taloned feet landed in the dirt.
 A shadow over my head! I ran.
 Two big black triangles came down from the
sky above me. They dug in, just in front of me!
Just behind me!
 Like a power shovel, the two triangles closed
together. I was inside. I was in darkness. Total
darkness. Some big, muscular thing was crushing me,
squeezing me.
 I couldn't breathe. I couldn't see. I was being
squeezed and pummeled.
 And then I realized . . .
 I was being swallowed.
 AAAAAHHHHH! I
yelled.
 There are two kinds of thought-speak. Private,
which is like whispering right in one person's ear, and
public, which is like yelling.
 I was yell ing.
 Every person near that lake heard me. Normal
humans, who probably wondered, "What was that?"
And Controllers, who knew it was thought-speak.
 But I didn't care. I was being swallowed.
 Marco! Jake yelled.
What's happening?
 Marco! Everyone can hear
y! Ax warned.
I tried to control my panic. I was being
swallowed, but I wasn't dead yet.
 Something . . . something just grabbed
me! I said, aiming my thought-speak at
Jake and Ax only.
 I think it was a bird. Ax
said. I saw it. Very big and black. It
flew off.
 My spider legs were crushed against my side.
Two of them were broken. The hairs all over my
body were blind. My eyes were blind. There wasn't enough
air even for my spider body to live on.
 I was being forced down the gullet of a bird, flying
through the air, and seconds away from suffocating.
 Tobias? I cried
desperately. Can you hear
me?
 Marco? What's happening?
Tobias answered. His reply came from far off.
 A bird ate me. Black bird.
We're flying. Can you see . . . his
Help!
 Marco, there are a dozen big crows
flying. I can't tell which one.
 I felt my mind beginning to fade. The spider was
dying.
What would happen if the spider
died?
I wondered, as my attention drifted away.
What would happen to the big wad of Marco
mass in Z-space?
 That thought did it. I was outta there.
Morph out!
 I tried to form a mental picture of my own
real self. A mental picture of a human named
Marco. But it was all confused. My mind was dying,
and as it sank it called up a thousand images.
Images of wolves and giant ants and
gorillas. Images of all the animals I had
been, all the minds I had lived in.
 I couldn't grab that human image and hold
onto it. But then, floating up in my
disintegrating consciousness, came the image of my
mother.
 I guess that's not a surprise. They say dying
soldiers on the battlefield often call out for their
mothers with their dying breaths. And I guess that's what
I was doing, too.
 But this was my real mother. The way she'd been when
she was truly alive. Not the Controller. Not the
Controller known as Visser One, but my own real
mom.
 She was smiling at me. She was much taller than
me, but she bent down to pick me up. I flew,
up in the air, up to her face. She kissed me.
 "You are going to grow up to be so cute," she said.
"My little Marco."
 Marco. The human boy. I saw myself clearly
then, like I was looking through her eyes at the little
toddler I'd been. Not the Animorph Marco, but
the little kid Marco.
 Suddenly . . .
The pressure was growing. Growing. I was squeezed
from all sides. I felt muscle tensing to restrain
me, but then, the muscle weakened and quivered.
 A ripping, tearing sound!
 Light! Light!
 I was demorphing. Demorphing and growing. I had
burst through the throat of the crow! And now, I was
falling!
 Marco! Tobias yelled.
 Muddy, distorted vision showed me the crow falling
alongside me.
 I was falling. Falling through the air, a vile
mix of crippled spider and emerging human.
 I was the size of a baseball, I guess, and
getting bigger. I hate to even think of what I
looked like. I know I wasn't pretty.
 WHAMMMMM!
 I hit the ground. I bounced. I hit the ground
again.
 I lay there, not knowing where I was, or what I
was. But I knew one thing for sure. I was going
to demorph. I was getting OUT OF THAT
MORPH!
 If I'd had a mouth, I would have started screaming
and never stopped. But my mouth reappeared late.
Four of my spider legs withered and disappeared. My
remaining legs became human arms and legs. My
tiny claws became toes. My fangs and jaws
became teeth and lips.
My eight spider eyes shut down one after
another, leaving only two. And slowly, those two
eyes became fully human.
 I looked up through human eyes at a blue
sky. At the high branches of trees looming above
me.
 And then, I looked up into the face of my former
schoolmate, Erek.
 Erek the android.
 Marco?" Erek said. "Didn't you used to have
longer hair?"
 The hair thing again. Anyway, to my human eyes
Erek looked completely, one hundred percent
human. I knew it wasn't true, but even so, it
was almost impossible not to believe the holographic
projection that surrounded the android.
 Could I remorph into something powerful enough to ...
to make sure he wouldn't be a problem? Probably
not. There were Controllers all around the area. All
he had to do was yell for help.
 Just then, a girl came running up. She looked
down at me, then at Erek.
 "Who is this?" the girl asked.
"His name is Marco," Erek said calmly. "You
know the "Andalite bandits" Chapman is
always talking about? The ones who use Andalite
morph-+ technology to carry on a guerrilla
war?"
 "Of course," she said.
 Erek pointed down at me. "I think this human
is one of them."
 There it was: the end. The end of our existence as
Animorphs. We'd always known that if the Yeerks
ever discovered our true identities, or even that we
were humans, they would wipe us out within a matter of
days.
 I felt sick. Sick with fear for myself, and for the
others. I'd blown it. I'd given away our great
secret.
 Erek jerked his head toward the girl. "This is my
friend Jenny."
 I was not pleased to meet her.
 I heard the sound of people rushing through bushes.
 "Nothing over here," Erek said loudly. "Jenny
hurt her ankle. I'll help her. Keep
searching. I think I heard something over there."
 Erek must have noticed the extremely shocked and
puzzled expression on my face. He grinned.
"There are more things in heaven and Earth than are dreamt
of in your philosophy, Horatio.""
 "Shakespeare?" I said, amazed.
 "Yes.
Hamlet.
I saw the very first performance."
"But ... but that would have been like centuries ago."
 Erek nodded. "Do you know where I live?"
 I nodded, with my head still down in the dirt.
 "Morph into something small enough to escape from here,"
Erek suggested. "Come to see me at my house, you
and your friends. We have a lot to talk about."
 For some stupid reason I said, "You're not
human. We know you're an android."
 "And you're not an Andalite bandit," Erek said.
 "How do I know I can trust you?"
 Erek shrugged. "I could turn you in, right now.
I'd be Visser Three's new best friend. Even the
Visser knows how to reward those who carry out his
orders well."
 "Maybe you want to catch all of us at once,"
I said. Don't ask me why I was arguing with him.
Maybe it was the humiliating position I was in.
Maybe I felt like I had to act tough since I
was on my back in the dirt, wearing severely
unattractive clothing.
 Erek squatted down. "Marco, if I
gave you to Visser Three, he would get the names of
all your friends from you. I know you're a brave
person. You'd have to be, to do all you and your friends have
done. But you are not brave enough to survive the
Visser's torture. You would tell."
I took a couple of seconds to think about that. He
was right, of course. I had a healthy respect for the
kind of torture Visser Three could inflict.
 "We'll be there," I said. "I guess we
don't have a choice. You have us by the ... you have us
cold."
 Erek shook his head. "It's not like that. It will be a
meeting of allies, Marco. You see, we, too,
fight the Yeerks."
 My dad made chicken for dinner that night. I'd
spent the afternoon with my friends, debating the mess with
Erek. We'd gone round and round, but in the end we
knew we would show up for the meeting. We had no
choice, really.
 Barbecued chicken, skin-on mashed potatoes,
roasted corn on the cob. This was the absolute
height of my father's cooking ability. So I had
to eat it. I had to.
 But man, there is something about popping out
through the throat of a bird that totally destroys your
appetite for dead bird.
 "How is it?" my dad asked.
 "Great," I answered.
 We were on the deck in our backyard. It was a
house like the house we'd lived in long ago when we
were a complete family. After my mom's "death" --
that's still how I thought about it- my dad had spiraled
down for a long time. He'd lost his job. We'd
moved out of the house and ended up living in a pretty
terrible apartment on the edge of a bad part of town.
 It was okay, really. I mean, having a lot of
stuff and a nice house is cool, but it wasn't being
poor that bothered me. It was being alone. My father had
been off in some world of his own for a long time. I'd
been the one who had to cook and clean and all that.
 It was nice to have a house and a yard and a barbecue
again. But it wasn't about the house. It was that my dad
was my dad again.
 I know that sounds corny, coming from me.
 "Another piece?"
 "Sure. Breast." I held out my plate and
tried not to think about exploding crows, or the fact that
I'd come very close to having beetle for lunch.
Sometimes my life was just too weird.
 I had questions to ask my father, but I wanted them
to sound natural. You know, like I was just making
normal conversation.
 "So, Dad. What are you doing at work
lately?"
 He shrugged and gave me a wink. "We're
finishing up the observatory project. I still can't
figure out what happened there. That software your
friend No accidentally created just sort of disappeared."
 My friend "No" was really Ax. There was a long
story behind all that. You could probably ask our
friendly neighborhood Andalite about it, but it
wasn't a story I could tell my father.
 "What'll you do then, after you get done at the
observatory?" I asked, trying to seem totally
casual by chomping on corn the whole time.
 My dad's eyes flickered toward me, almost
suspiciously. He shrugged. "A project I
can't talk about for this company called Matcom."
 I laughed, trying to stay very casual. "Building
a better bomb?"
 He didn't answer for a few seconds. Then,
in a strange voice, he said, "I've never done
weapons research."
 I was actually surprised. "Why not?"
 "You gonna eat that chicken or just tease it?"
He gave me a long look, like he was trying
to decide if I was old enough to hear what he was going
to say.
 I picked up the chicken breast. Chicken
wasn't crow, after all.
 "It was your mom," he said.
 I stopped eating.
 "The last year, year and a half before . . . you
know. Before. It was like this perfect time for us." He
smiled at some picture only he could
see. "We used to fight every now and then when you were
younger, like most couples. But then it was as if all our
problems were gone, settled. Maybe I had
changed. Maybe she had. I don't know."
 I felt cold fingers around my heart.
 "It was the best time of my life," he said. "It
was like we'd achieved some level of perfect peace and
perfect love. But at the same time, there were these
times when your mom would seem upset. Like she was
struggling with some problem she wouldn't tell me about."
 I had stopped breathing. I knew. I knew now
when the change had been made. The perfect love
my father was talking about was the Yeerk at work in my
mother's head. The Yeerk wasn't interested
in stupid little domestic battles. It wanted
peace so that it could focus on deeper goals.
 "Anyway, one day I woke up in the middle
of the night. Your mom was sitting up in bed, wide
awake. I knew she'd had a bad dream or
something. But it made the hair on the back of my
neck stand up. It was just. . ." He shook his head.
"It was so strange. She sounded like she was trapped in
a deep well, and trying to call out to me."
 There were tears in my eyes. I hoped my father
wouldn't notice.
"She said, They won't take you if you stay away
from the military." It didn't make any sense.
But the way she said it... like it was the hardest thing
she'd ever said . . . like it was the most important
thing she'd ever said."
 I had some idea just how hard it had been for my
mother to say that. Sometimes, when there is some terrible
need, the human being crushed beneath the Yeerk can force
its way out. It can seize control for a few
desperate seconds.
 They say the price the human host pays is
terrible. The Yeerk has mental tortures it can
carry on for weeks.
 My mother, my
real
mother, had struck when the Yeerk was distracted, and for a
few seconds regained control.
 "Anyway," my dad said, "I know it was just your
mom having a bad dream. But ever since then, whenever
an opportunity came up to do defense work, I just
got this bad feeling about it."
 I couldn't even pretend to eat any more.
 "Dad, are you thinking about taking on a military
project now?"
 He avoided my gaze. "There are some very
exciting things going on with this Matcom. The thing they
want me on isn't military in any way.
But... well, they do carry on some very secret work.
I guess some of what they do is probably
military."
There it was. The reason Tom was trying to get me
to bring my father to The Sharing. My father was working on some
project that the Yeerks wanted to control.
 My mother had warned him. It may have been the last
words that she, the real, human woman, ever spoke
to him.
 He was going to ignore that warning, and now the
Yeerks wanted him.
92
 We had decided to meet with Erek at his house.
We had not decided to trust him completely.
 Jake, Cassie, Ax, and I were going to the
meeting.
 Rachel and Tobias stayed outside as backup.
Rachel was all primed to use her grizzly bear
morph if we called for help.
 "I'll be within range of Ax's thought-speak,"
she said for the tenth time. "I can morph my bear in a
minute and go through that door about ten seconds later."
 "If you do that, try not to stomp over me in the
process, okay?" I said.
I glanced up and saw Tobias swooping down
to settle in the tree in Erek's yard.
 I could joke about it, but the truth was, it did
feel reassuring to know Rachel and Tobias were
ready to be the cavalry.
 We went up to the front door of the very
ordinary-looking house. I sent Jake a look that
said, "Man, I hope we're right about this." But
Jake was busy exchanging solemn glances with
Cassie.
 "So? Someone knock on the door," I said. I
glanced at Ax. He was in his human morph. His
human morph is made up of DNA
gathered at the same time from all of us except
Tobias. There's some of Jake and Rachel and
Cassie and me in Ax's human shape. In the end
result he's male, but almost as pretty as a
girl.
 Plus, he's annoying in human morph.
 "Knock? Knock on the door? Why?
Knockon. Knock-kuh."
 Andalites don't have mouths, and Ax can't get
over how fun it is to make actual sounds.
Plus, you don't even want the boy in the same
room with certain foods.
 Jake knocked.
 The door opened. I was surprised. It wasn't
Erek. It was his father, Mr. King.
 He nodded. "Come in."
 We stepped inside. I felt completely
dorky. It
was like we were coming over to ask if Erek could come out and
play. I mean, the house looked so normal
inside. Normal furniture and normal lights
and normal dishes displayed in a hutch. A
normal TV on "mute," showing pictures from
CNN.
 There were two dogs, a Labrador mix
and a fat little terrier. The Lab just lolled over on
its back. The terrier came running over to sniff
our shoes.
 "Is Erek here?" I asked.
 Mr. King nodded. "Yes. Would you like a soda
or anything?"
 "No thanks, Mr. King," Cassie said. She
bent over to scratch behind the terrier's ears.
 "You like dogs?" Mr. King asked.
 "She likes any animal," I answered.
"She even likes skunks."
 "But dogs, do you like dogs?"
 Cassie smiled. "If reincarnation were real,
I'd want to come back as a dog."
 Mr. King smiled, nodding as if Cassie had just
said something profound. "Would you all come with me?"
 He turned and led the way toward the kitchen.
Once again, the total normalcy of it seemed
jarring. There were little Post-It notes on the
refrigerator saying things like "dozen eggs, bell
peppers." Someone had left a box of Wheaties out
on the counter.
Mr. King opened a door. It led down to the
basement. We followed him down the narrow wooden
steps.
 At this point I started to wonder. I noticed that
Ax was morphing slowly out of his human shape,
returning to Andalite form a little at a time.
 Good old Ax. He sensed danger and he wanted
his tail available.
 I wanted his tail available, too.
 Mr. King paused when we all got down to the
basement. He watched with absolutely no
surprise as Ax finished transforming. He waited
politely for Ax to be done.
 Then, to my utter amazement, I felt a slight
dropping sensation. It took a few seconds
to realize what was happening. The basement was dropping
like an elevator. When I looked up I couldn't
see a roof overhead, just darkness.
 "Whoa," Cassie commented.
 "Don't be afraid," Mr. King said.
 It didn't last long. We may have dropped
four or five floors. At least that's what it
felt like to me. Then, with a slight lurch, the
basementst elevator stopped.
 "Is this the floor for men's clothing?" I asked.
 I was almost not surprised when one entire wall
of the basement, hung with tools and garden hose and a
rake and hoe, simply disappeared.
Where the wall had been was now a hallway lit with a
golden light.
 "My basement won't do this," I muttered
to Jake.
 "Have you ever tried?" he asked.
 "This way," Mr. King said.
 We followed him. It was way too late to start
worrying now.
 The hallway wasn't long, just fifty feet or
so. It reached a dead end, a blank wall. But then
that wall, too, disappeared.
 "Yah!"
 "No way!"
 Strange.
 "This is just a hologram, right?" I said. But
somehow, I knew it wasn't. It was real.
Unbelievable, yet real.
 What was beyond the hallway was a vast, vast
chamber, lit in glowing gold light, soft and
buttery warm.
 I stepped out of the hallway onto springy
grass. And over my head, maybe a hundred
feet up, there was a glowing orb, like a sun. That's
where the yellow light came from.
 Stretched out before us, for more than the length
of a football field, was a sort of park.
Trees, grass, streams, flowers, butterflies
flying around jerkily, bees buzzing from flower
to flower, squirrels racing up and down the trees.
Walking here and there were androids. Androids in their
natural form, machines made of steel and something
white. The androids had mouths that were almost like
muzzles, clumsy-looking legs, and stubby fingers.
 But it wasn't the presence of half-dozen or so
androids that was really shocking. What was really shocking
was that there were hundreds, maybe even a thousand dogs.
Normal, everyday Earth dogs, every breed and
half-breed you could imagine, running in packs,
yipping, yapping, bowwowing, howling, growling,
ruff-ruffing dogs. They were chasing squirrels,
smelling each other, and generally having a great ole
dog time.
 Jake, Cassie, and I stood there with our jaws
hanging open like complete idiots. If Ax had
possessed a mouth, his would have been hanging open,
too.
 It was doggie heaven. Dogs and robots in a
huge, underground park.
 One of the robots came trotting toward us. As it
got near, a hologram shimmered around it.
A second later, it was Erek.
 "Welcome," he said. "I guess you're
probably a little surprised."
 e are the Chee," Erek said.
 Mr. King had left, and Erek had brought us to a
place beneath a large tree. A little stream trickled
by, just a few feet away. A wall of silence
had come down, as if someone had turned down the sound
of all the barking dogs. I could still hear them, but it was
as if the sound were far away now.
 You are androids. Ax
commented.
 "Yes."
 You show a very high level of
technological sophistication. Ax said.
 Erek smiled with what looked exactly like human
lips. "We are just the creation. It is our
creators who were the great builders."
"Why did you bring us down here?" Jake asked.
"Why show us all this?"
 "We want you to trust us," Erek said. "We know
that you're suspicious. You have to be. I'm sure
you've left some of your people outside, just in case we
betray you. I wanted us to be equal. I
wanted you to know our secrets, since we know yours."
 "We saw you at the concert," I started to say.
 He looked surprised, then nodded. "Ah,
yes. You were the two dogs, weren't you? I sensed
something odd about you. Tell me: What's it like
to actually be a dog?"
 "It's truly cool," Jake said. "You knew
we were the two dogs?"
 Erek shook his head. "We didn't know, but I
felt something strange. We've known there were
morph-capable forces on Earth. There is very little that
the Yeerks know that we don't also know."
 "You were handing out flyers for The Sharing. You were at a
meeting of The Sharing," I accused.
 "True. But maybe I should tell you our story.
Then you'll understand who we are. And why we are your
allies. And also why we ... or at least
some
of us ... would like your help."
 "That would be nice," Cassie said.
 You have to say one thing for Erek: The boy
knew how to tell a story. Suddenly, everything around
us dissolved. In its place there grew a
vast, three-dimensional picture. It looked as
real
as Erek.
We were no longer on Earth. There were two
suns in the sky, one small and almost red, the other
four times as big as Earth's sun and a
deeper gold.
The trees and flowers and grasses around us
were definitely not anything that had ever grown on
Earth. The trunks of the trees were green and smooth.
But instead of leaves, the branches just kept
splitting into ever smaller branches and twigs that
grew gradually from green to silver to a brilliant
shade of pink. These pink twigs were all
intertwined, so that from a distance the trees
looked like huge balls of pink steel wool.
The trees were no larger than Earth trees, it
seemed to me, but what was huge were the
mushrooms. At least, they looked kind of like
mushrooms. They were half as large as the trees
themselves. Messy nests of some leathery, leaping,
three-legged animal seemed to be perched
on each of the mushrooms.
There were other animals around, each stranger than the
last. But the main animal we
saw was a two-legged creature that stood may
be four feet tall. It had long,
floppy ears and a
muzzle.
It looked weirdly like a dog that could walk on its
hind legs. It looked, in fact, a little like Erek
when he dropped the hologram and showed his true
self.
 "Our creators," Erek said. "They were known as
Pemalites. A hundred thousand years before the
Andalites learned to make fire, the Pemalites
were capable of faster-than-light travel."
 I noticed Ax's tail twitch a little at that.
 "And of course, humans were just hairy apes when the
Pemalites first visited Earth. The Pemalites
were not interested in conquest, or in interfering in the
lives of other planets. They enjoyed life."
Erek smiled. "They loved to play. They loved
games and jokes and laughter. And they had been a
fully evolved race for so long that all the harsher
instincts were gone from them. They had no evil in their
hearts. They had no evil in their souls."
 I found this hard to believe. But as I watched the
hologram around me, it was possible to believe that on
this weird planet the Pemalites had found some
deep inner peace. There was just a sense of deep
calm about the place. Like one of those Zen
gardens or something. It just felt peaceful.
Peaceful, but not dead or tired or boring. In
fact, everywhere I looked, I saw Pemalites
jumping around, chasing, playing, and making
an odd
CHUK
CHUK CHUK that must have been
laughter.
The scene around me changed, like a movie
doing a flash-forward. Now, mingled in with the
Pemalites, were androids like Erek. The androids
looked vaguely like their canine creators.
"We were toys, originally," Erek said. "The
Pemalites made us to play with. They called us the
Chee. It's a word that means "friend." They
also had work for us to do, but they created us
mostly to be their companions. An artificial
race,
yes, but not a race of mechanical slaves."
Erek looked at us and I swear there were tears
in his holographic eyes. "We were their friends and
equals and companions. They taught us to
laugh and play. They loved it when they were able
to create androids who could tell a joke. There was a
celebration that lasted a year."
Then . . . ZZZZZZZAAAAAAAARRRRPPPP!
I jerked back. A monstrous beam of light
sliced the ground open right in front of us, like some
insane plow tearing up the earth. It inciner
ated the pink Brillo pad trees and the huge
mushrooms.
"Then the Howlers came," Erek explained. "They
suddenly popped out of Zero-space, thou
sands of powerful ships. They had come from clear
outside this galaxy. The Pemalites had no
idea who they were. And they never found out what the
Howlers wanted. The Howlers made no demands.
They just attacked. Maybe that's all they wanted:
to destroy."
 What Erek showed us next was like one of those
horrifying films from World War II.
Pe-malites hunted from the air. Pemalite
space stations blown apart. Pemalite ships
sliced open, and helpless Pemalites left
to drift through cold, dead space. The scenes of
massacre just went on and on.
 I noticed Cassie was crying. I think I was
crying, too. It was too horrible.
 "Almost the entire race of Pemalites was wiped
out," Erek said. "A few hundred Chee
and a few hundred Pemalites left the planet,
escaping in a single ship just seconds ahead of a
new wave of Howler attacks.
 "We escaped into Zero-space. We had no
plan, no idea what to do."
 "Why didn't you fight back?" I demanded.
"I mean, you talk about how advanced the
Pemalites were. If they could create androids,
they could create weapons."
 Erek looked at me and nodded, like he agreed.
"The Pemalites had forgotten the ways of conflict
and war. They were creatures of peace. They'd
forgotten that there could be such a thing as pure evil."
That answer just frustrated me. It made no sense.
But I let Erek tell the rest of his grim story.
 "As we ran for our lives through Zero-space,
we discovered that the Howlers had achieved a special
revenge. The Pemalites began to become sick.
They began to die. The Howlers had unleashed germ
weapons. The Pemalites were doomed. But we
Chee, we androids, were unaffected."
 The scene around us became the inside of a space
ship. A scene of Chee, looking on helplessly
while one of their creators writhed in pain.
 "Then we remembered a planet. A
planet similar to our own, but very far from our home
and the Howlers. It had only one sun and the light was
pale, but there were trees and grass and wonderful
oceans."
 "Earth," Cassie said.
 "Earth," Erek said. "The Pemalites had not
visited Earth in fifty thousand years, and in that time,
everything had changed. The wandering tribes of
primates had created cities. They had
domesticated animals. They were planting crops.
 "We landed on Earth with just six Pemalites still
clinging to life."
 The hologram disappeared, and the underground cavern was
back to its normal self -- a wide park of
Earth trees and Earth plants, with dogs everywhere.
"We could not save the Pemalites. They
would die. But we could try and rescue some
part
of them. We hoped we could keep their hearts,
their souls alive somehow. We looked for an Earth
species we could use to harbor the essence of
the Pemalites. Their decency. Their kindness.
Their playfulness and love."
"Wolves," Cassie said, once again way ahead
of me.
Erek looked surprised, but he nodded his
holographically projected human head. "Yes.
They looked most like the Pemalites themselves. We
grafted the essence of the Pemalites into the
wolf species. And from that union, dogs were cre
ated. To this day, most dogs carry within them the essence
of the Pemalites. Not all, but most.
Wherever you see a dog playing, chasing a stick,
running around barking for the sheer joy of life,
you see the remnants of the race of Pemalites."
"That's why all these dogs are here," Jake
said. "They're your. . . what, friends? Creators?"
"They are our joy," Erek said, "because they
remind us of a world without evil. The world we lost.
We Chee are all that is left of Pemalite
tech
nological genius. The dogs of Earth are all that
is
left of Pemalite souls."
i. don't think I would have believed any of it.
Except for the small fact that we were in a huge
underground park. And there were androids walking around.
 Plus, there was the fact that my entire life had
become one long, incredible, unbelievable story.
So who was I to laugh at Erek's story?
 "So you all pass as humans?" I asked
Erek.
 He nodded. "Yes. We live as humans.
We play the role of children and then grow older, and
eventually our hologram is allowed to "die"
and we start again as children."
 "How long has this been going on?" Cassie
asked.
Erek smiled warmly. "I helped to build the great
pyramid."
 "You designed the pyramids?"
 "No, no, of course not. We have never interfered
in human affairs. I was a slave. I helped
to quarry the stone. It was a challenge, because I was
new at pretending to be human. I had to hide my
real strength, of course. The Pemalite home world
had a gravity four times stronger than Earth's.
Naturally, we were designed for that gravity, which
means we are quite powerful by human standards."
 "And you stayed as a slave?" Jake asked. "You
could have taken over Egypt. You could have taken over the
world."
 "No. We are not the Yeerks," he said
coldly. "You see, when our creators made us,
they hardwired us for nonviolence. We are
not capable of hurting another living being. No Chee
has
ever
taken a life."
 Just then, I noticed a group of four Chee
walking quickly toward us.
 Erek saw them, too. Even though I know his
"face" was just a hologram, it seemed to me he was
annoyed.
 "What have you done?" one of the Chee demanded.
"What have you done, you fool?"
 The four Chee came up and glared at us with
robot eyes. "Humans? An Andalite? Here?
What have you told them?"
 "Everything," Erek said defiantly. "These are the
ones, these humans and this Andalite, who have been
resisting the Yeerks. They're the ones who can
morph." His voice rose. "They are the ones who
are fighting the battle
we
should fight."
 "We are Chee. We do not fight," one of the
androids said. It turned on its holographic
projector. A human body appeared. The body
of an old woman, maybe eighty years
old.
 "I am Chee-lonos. My human name for now
is Maria," she said. "I did not mean to seem
angry toward you humans, or you, my Andalite
friend. My dispute is with this Chee called Erek and
some of his friends."
 "We stood by helplessly as the Howlers
annihilated our creators," Erek said to Maria.
"We can't stand by helplessly and watch this world be
destroyed, too. Dogs and humans are intertwined.
They have evolved a dependency. Dogs cannot
survive without humans. If the humans fall to the
Yeerks, we, the last great masterpieces of the
Pemalites, and the dogs, their spirit-homes, will all
die, too."
 I gave Jake a look. That's why the Chee
wanted to help humans? To save dogs? Jake
shook his head slightly in amusement.
"We do
not
fight," Maria said heatedly. "We do
not
kill. You know that, Erek. Yet you bring these
outsiders here. You blurt the secrets we have kept
for thousands of years. Why? What good can come
from it? We cannot fight to save the humans."
 "That's where you're wrong," Erek said softly.
"We
can
fight. While you and the others merely hope everything will
work out, my friends and I have been infiltrating the
Yeerk organizations here on Earth. The Yeerks
even think that I am one of
them."
 Maria and the three unhologrammed Chee just stared.
 "The Yeerks have been busy. They control a
computer company called Matcom."
 It took me a couple of seconds to remember
that name.
 Erek went on. "The Yeerks are working on a
master computer to infiltrate and rewrite all the
software in all the computers on Earth. When they have
achieved sufficient force among humans, they will
launch this computer bomb, and in a flash, control
all computers."
 "What does this have to do with us?" Maria asked.
 "The heart of this system is a crystal the
Yeerks obtained from a Dayang trader. The
Dayang didn't know what he had. But the Yeerks
did. The crystal is a processor more
sophisticated than anything even the Andalites could
create. And it is more than fifty-thousand Earth
years old."
 "A Pemalite crystal!" Maria gasped.
 "Yes. A Pemalite crystal. If we had
it, we could rewrite our own internal systems. Do
you understand now? We could erase the prohibition against
violence. We could be free! Free to fight!"
 "A Pemalite crystal," Maria whispered.
"You can't do this, Erek. You can't!"
 But Erek just turned away. "If we can get the
crystal, there is very little we can't do. Our strength,
joined with these Animorphs? The Yeerks would have
to double their forces just to contain us."
 How did you convince the Yeerks that you
are one of them? Ax asked him.
 Erek turned off his hologram and became a
machine once again. And then the front of his head
split open. Inside his steel and ivory head was a
chamber, just a few inches in diameter.
 And inside that chamber was a gray slug,
helpless, unable to escape. Tiny wires, no
thicker than hairs, wrapped around it.
 Yeerk! Ax hissed.
 "Yes," Erek said. "The Yeerks
believe I am human. I accepted infestation. But
of course the
Yeerk cannot make a Controller of me. I made a
place for him instead. He sees nothing. Knows
nothing. I tapped
his
memory, not the other way around. And now I can pass
among the Yeerks like one of them."
 I had two reactions. One, I was sick at the
thought of that Yeerk, trapped inside a steel cage.
As much as I hated Yeerks, it seemed harsh just the
same.
 But another reaction was much stronger. We had an
ally! A powerful ally. An android who could
pass as a Controller, who could enter Yeerk
society. And an android with many powers of his own.
 "How do you keep the Yeerk alive without
Kandrona rays?" Cassie asked.
 See, every three days a Yeerk has to return
to the Yeerk pool to absorb Kandrona rays. Without
that, they die.
 "I am able to use my own internal power
to generate Kandrona rays to keep this Yeerk
alive," Erek explained. "When I go to the Yeerk
pool I am able to trick the Yeerks
into believing that my Yeerk is swimming in the pool.
I generate a hologram of a Yeerk leaving my ear
and dropping into the pool. Later, I create a
hologram of it returning. The Yeerks never
notice that they don't encounter this Yeerk actually
in
the pool. Yeerks communicate very little in their
natural states."
"How do we fit into all this?" Jake asked. "I
mean, what do you want with us, Erek?"
 Erek resumed his human appearance. He stepped
toward us, eager, excited. "We could fight together
against the Yeerks. We could be allies. If only
... we need that Pemalite crystal. But the
Yeerks have created a maze of defenses like nothing you
can imagine. That crystal is in a room at the
heart of the Matcom building. There are
Hork-Bajir everywhere. Elite Hork-Bajir
warriors, the best.
 "And the crystal itself is guarded by an ingenious
system. It is concealed in a room of absolute
darkness. Absolute darkness. The slightest,
faintest light, ultraviolet, infrared, any
light, will set off alarms. Within the darkness are
wires that are set off by the slightest
touch."
 "So to get to the crystal you'd have to be able to find it
without seeing it, and avoid the wires that are also
invisible in the darkness," I said.
 "It's like finding a needle in a haystack when
you're blindfolded and can't touch a single piece of
hay. The walls, ceiling, and floor are all
pressure-sensitive, so you can't touch them. It
may be impossible," Erek said.
 "How are we supposed to do that?" I demanded.
"How can you find something you can't see? It's not like
it'll smell or call out to us."
 "Urn . . ." Cassiesd.
"Excuse me?" Jake asked in surprise.
 "It can be done," Cassie said. "I mean ...
if we
want
to."
 "Of course we want to," I said. "With these
guys on our side, we actually have a chance of
winning. Of
course
we want to. Animorphs and Chee together? Our
morphing ability, their strength and holographic
tricks? We'd kick Yeerk butt."
 "No," Maria cried. "You don't understand.
Chee do not hurt. Chee do not kill. No Chee
has ever taken a life." She grabbed my arm and
looked right in my eyes. "While humans and
Yeerks and Andalites and Hork-Bajir and a
million other species on a million worlds
warred and slaughtered and conquered, we remained at
peace. Would you end all that? Would you make us
killers, too?"
 "Yes, ma'am, I guess I would," I said,
a little coldly. "We're in a fight for our lives
here. Our parents, our brothers and sisters, our friends
-- they are all going to be slaves of the Yeerks,
if we don't win. So I'll do whatever it
takes. If you'd fought all those thousands of years
ago, the Pe-malites would still be alive. And you
wouldn't be living with dogs in a big underground
kennel."
 I didn't mention the sudden interest The Sharing had
in my father. I didn't want to make this personal.
Maria let me go, and Erek nodded.
 "A big underground kennel," Erek said
bitterly. "Exactly."
 "We'll get your crystal for you," Jake said.
"Tell us all you know about this Matcom, and
we'll get your crystal." He looked at the
Chee called Maria. "Sorry, but Marco is
right. The Yeerks have my brother. There's nothing I
won't do to get him back."
 We rode the fake basement back up, leaving the
eerie golden world of dogs behind.
 "S. Do we have a deal?" Erek asked. "You'll
help us get the Pemalite crystal? And then
we'll fight alongside you to defeat the Yeerks."
 "Sounds good to me," I said quickly.
 "Unless anyone has any objection -" Jake
started to say.
 That's when Cassie interrupted. "Erek, let us
talk it over. It's a big decision."
 I was surprised, but not as surprised as Jake
was.
 Then we heard a noise coming from directly above
us.
 "HhhhrrrAAAAWWWWRRRR!"
"Oh, man," I said. I knew that sound. We
all knew that sound.
 "Rachel," Cassie said under her breath.
 "We were down there a long time," Jake said.
"Erek, I think a friend of ours may have come
in to rescue us."
 Erek shrugged. "I don't think it's going to be
a problem."
 "You don't know our friend," I said.
 The basement had settled back into its normal
place. I tore up the stairway. "Rachel!
Chill!"
 I burst back into the utterly normal kitchen and
raced into the utterly normal living room.
 The front door of the house had been ripped off
its hinges. The couch was thrown against one wall. And
there, in the middle of the room, standing so tall its head
scraped the ceiling, was a full-grown grizzly
bear.
 "HhhhRRAAAAWWRRR!" Rachel roared in
rage and frustration.
 Frustration, see, because the Chee who passed as
Erek's father had her in a full nelson. His
human-holograph arms were wrapped around the
unbelievably massive shoulders of the grizzly,
and he was actually holding the great bear still.
 He had pinned a grizzly so powerful it could
literally turn a Toyota into an aluminum can.
 "Okay, now I've seen everything," I said.
 You Chee are very
strong. Ax commented.
This was the understatement of all time.
 Where have you been8! Rachel
demanded. I waited as long as I could.
I figured you were dead or something. And if you don't
have a good explanation, you
will
be dead!
 "Oh, we have a story, all right," Cassie
said.
 Rachel had calmed down and stopped roaring when she
saw us. Now the Chee slowly released her, and she
began to change back out of morph.
 Jake looked embarrassed and started to pull the
couch back down. "Urn, Erek, this is our friend
Rachel."
 "It was smart of you to keep a reserve," Erek
commented. To Rachel he said, "I hope you weren't
hurt."
 "How come you can wrestle a grizzly if you have
to be nonviolent?" I asked Erek.
 "Of course, my "father" here knew she was not a
true bear. And he only held onto her. He
did not destroy her. If Rachel had been strong
enough to win, my "father" would have had no choice
but to allow himself to be destroyed."
 I laughed. "I see why you want to change that."
 I expected Erek to agree. Instead, he
looked a little sad. "Yes," he said. Just that one
word.
 We started to leave. I let the others get a
few steps ahead of me. I pulled Erek over.
"Hey,
Erek. You were at my mom's funeral. I don't
think I said thanks at the time."
 Erek looked away and bit his lip. "Marco .
. . there's something I have to tell you."
 "I think I already know. My mother isn't dead.
She's a Controller. She's Visser One."
 It was Erek's turn to be impressed. "You
guys have learned a lot."
 I shrugged. "Is that why you were at the funeral?
Did you know?"
 Erek nodded. "I knew. I might have been able
to save her... if."
 I met his gaze. "Too late to save her,"
I said. "But payback is going to be very painful for
those filthy slugs."
 On the way home, we filled Rachel and
Tobias in on what had happened. It
took a while. We were back at Cassie's barn
before we were done.
 "I say do it," Rachel said. "That Chee guy
held onto me like I was a baby. They're strong.
They have technology we don't. They've already
penetrated The Sharing. They would double our chances.
End of story."
 "No,
not
end of story," Cassie said, contradicting her friend.
"What right do we have to interfere and destroy the thousands
of years of peace this species has had? Didn't
you hear Maria? No Chee has ever taken another
life. You
want them to be saying a thousand years from now that no
Chee ever took a life till
we
made them killers?"
 I rounded on her, angry. "What I don't
want a thousand years from now is for people to be saying,
Too bad about the humans. They ended up as dead as
the Pemalites.""
 "Ax?" Jake asked. "You haven't said much."
 Ax was in human morph, of course, since we
were in the barn. "As you know, we Andalites
are not supposed to interfere in the lives of other
species. I am already breaking that law with you. And
I am proud to be breaking that law in this case. But
the Chee . . . Chee! It makes a funny sound,
doesn't it? Chee." He smiled with his human
mouth, then grew serious again. "The Chee are a
different species. Older than Andalites. I
feel . . . badly . . . helping another
species to become violent."
 Rachel said, "Look, no one likes violence.
All right? But we didn't ask for this war with the
Yeerks. When the bad guys come after you, when
they
start the violence, they leave you no choice: fight
or die."
 "Fight or die," I agreed. "And you want
proof? Look at the Pemalites. They didn't
fight, they died. All gone. No more. Scratch a
whole species. Now their 'essence," whatever that
means, is stuck inside dogs, and their robots
feed them
extra kibble. Yippee. That worked out real well for
them. And even that's better off than we'll be if
we lose to the Yeerks."
 "Law of the jungle," Rachel said.
"You eat or you get eaten."
 Maybe s. Tobias said,
speaking up for the first time. But still,
wouldn't it be nice if that wasn't the
law?
 "How can you take that attitude?" I demanded.
"You're a predator. You know how it is."
 Yes. I know exactly how it is.
That doesn't mean I like it. Look, the
Pemalites were wiped out, maybe because they didn't
fight. Maybe they'd have lost even if they had
fought. We'll never know. But the Chee have lived for
thousands of years. I know they're androids, but
they're a species, too. They've survived without
killing. Doesn't something about that make you jealous?
Don't you wish we could say the same? Don't you
wish Homo sapiens could face the universe and
honestly say, "We do not kill? We don't
enslave. We don't make war"?
 "I don't make the rules," I said. "I
didn't start this war. Humans didn't start this
war. Look, I don't want to make this
personal, but I know the name Matcom. My dad
is involved in some work with them. And the other day Tom
..." I shot a glance at Jake.
"His brother was on me to come to The Sharing and bring
my father. The Sharing
is targeting my dad, and now we know why. So for
me, it's simple: If we take this Pemalite
crystal,
maybe my dad isn't involved with Matcom any
more. And maybe the Yeerks find someone else
to infest."
No one had an answer to that. I knew they
wouldn't.
Cassie walked down to the far end of the barn
and came back carrying a small cage.
"Total darkness, can't touch walls, floor, or
ceiling, and you have to travel through a room
strung with sensitive wires you can't even see."
She held up the cage. "Meet the animal that can
do all that."
It was no larger than a small rat with its leathery
wings folded back.
"Cool," I said. "First I'm Spiderman, now
I
get to be Batman."
I thought for once we'd get a chance to practice
with the bat morph. We were planning to go after the
Pemalite crystal the next weekend.
Plenty of time to plan and prepare.
 Yeah, right.
 "Marco?" My dad yelled up the stairs to my
room, where I was desperately trying to figure out
some math homework.
 "Yeah?"
 "Phone."
 ""X" equals point oh-three-nine," I
reminded myself so I wouldn't lose my place. I
went out into the hall to grab the upstairs phone.
"Point oh-three-nine. Yeah, who is it?"
 "Hi, Marco. It's me, Erek."
"Oh, hi, Erek, what's up?" I hoped he would
remember our phones could be bugged.
 "Not much," he said, sounding very convincingly human.
"I was just thinking, though, you know that thing we were going to do
next weekend? Why don't we just do it tonight
instead?"
 I knew what the "thing" was. And I knew
Erek wasn't calling on a whim. Something had gone
wrong. I swallowed my heart, which had jumped up
into my throat. "Okay. Maybe I'll call
Jake and see if he wants to do it, too."
 "That'd be excellent," Erek said. "Later,
man."
 I hung up the phone and thought seriously about
pretending I hadn't gotten the call. I mean,
I wanted to do this. It was important, life and
death. But it was like something out of
Mis
sion: Impossible.
And without planning or practice, it was beyond
impossible.
 Plus, I had homework to do.
 I picked up the phone and called Jake. Four
hours later, with all of our parents asleep in their
beds, we met at Cassie's barn. All of us,
including Ax. Erek arrived last.
 He didn't waste time with small talk.
"There's a problem. The Yeerks are putting in a
brand new security system on top of the existing
systems. I don't think it's active yet, but
I can't find out what it is."
Fine. We can wait a few weeks
till you can get the details. Tobias
said.
 "The crystal is already so well protected that
any new system may put it beyond our grasp for
good," Erek said. "And don't forget -- the Yeerks
are racing to use this crystal to create a
computer system so powerful it can take over every computer
on Earth. They're not there yet. But the longer we
wait. . ."
 "Oh, man, this sucks," I said. "No
planning? No preparation? Just go in and hope for the
best?"
 "I'll tell you everything I know," Erek said.
"Listen carefully. It's not too complicated."
 For a few seconds we sort of teetered on the
edge. We weren't sure what to do. Erek wanted us
to go in, obviously. But he had his own interests, which
might not be the same as ours.
 It was the worst possible situation. Any one of
our parents could wake up and discover we were not at
home. That would mean frantic phone calls back
and forth from our folks to our friends' parents, calls to the
cops, probably search teams out beating the woods.
 "Go or don't go?" Jake asked.
 "Go," Rachel said, but with less enthusiasm than
usual. A lot less.
 "Go," I said. "But personally, I can't blame
anyone who wants to sit this one out."
Cassie gave me a dirty look. I guess
she took
it personally. "I say go," she said. "I
don't sit
anything out, Marco."
l'm not in th. Tobias said.
l'm useless
on this mission, so I don't vote.
I go where Prince Jake
goes. Ax said.
"Don't call me "prince,"" Jake said
wearily for the thousandth time. "Okay, we go."
Erek immediately began telling us all he knew about
Matcom and the security for the Pemalite crystal.
After about two minutes I was ready to
change my vote.
But by then it was too late. We'd made our
decision, and it was as if we were being swept toward a
waterfall
-
like a bunch of canoeists
who'd lost their last paddle. We'd survive
...
or
not
...
but one thing was sure. We were definitely going over
the edge.
"Q rek was not going with us. But he would
be waiting outside Matcom when we came out.
Assuming we came out.
We flew from Cassie's barn to the Matcom
building. It was one of those boring-looking,
three-story glass and cement buildings you see in
industrial parks everywhere. Just a bunch of blue
glass rectangles with a big parking lot in back.
In fact, it looked so much like every other bor
ing square building in the industrial park, we had
trouble finding it. We flew around, a lost gang of
owls, for a good fifteen minutes before Rachel
spotted the Matcom sign.
We landed on the roof of the building. Erek
had assured us there were no cameras or guards
up there.
"Let's find that pipe," Jake whispered as soon
as we were all human again. Or, in Ax's case,
Andalite.
"Erek said southwest corner, right?" I said.
"Astost8st8west," Cassie said.
She sounded sure, so I decided to agree.
"Yeah, that was it. Which way is northwest?"
Ax laughed in thought-speak, till he realized I
was serious. You can't find
directions? He sounded shocked. Like
he'd just discovered we had hidden tail blades.
lt's that corner over
there.
The pipe was about three inches in diameter.
"I hope this works," I said. "I don't even
know if my Spiderman can make silk."
"Spiderwoman," Cassie said. "Your spider
morph is female. Wolf spiders don't make
webs, but they do make silk. It should work."
"Easy for you say. I don't even know how to
turn on the silk thing."
But Ax was already morphing into the wolf spider, so I
hurried to catch up. By the time Ax
and I were in spider morph, the others had all be
come cockroaches.
Man, you two are ugly at this
scale. Rachel said. Jeez, I don't ever need to see another spi
der my own size again.
We're ugly? You want to know what
you
look like right now? You look like
dinner. I said, laughing evilly.
Juicy cockroach. This spider morph
is hungry, and you look tasty.
 Marco, get a grip.
Jake said patiently. lancet's do this.
 l'll demorph and step on your ugly
butt. Rachel growled.
 From where I was standing in the gravel of the rooftop, the
pipe looked like a round skyscraper. It extended
above the roof by about a foot, which is quite a distance when
you're half an inch high.
 I scampered around the pipe. One side had been
splashed with tar. It would be easy to grip. I raced
easily up the pipe to stand precariously on the
lip.
 I could feel a breeze blowing up from the
blackness beneath me. It was like standing on the edge of the
Grand Canyon. The pipe went down through all
three stories and an extra underground story. Four
floors. Bad enough when you're human size. A
million miles when you're a spider.
 Ax came crawling up to teeter alongside me.
 0ooookay. I said.
Now comes the fun part.
 I tried to search the spider brain, looking for the
subtle, secret signals that would start me spinning
silk.
Fortunately, the spider wasn't exactly
Albert Einstein. It only knew how to do about four
things, one of which was spin silk.
 The spider body sort of... well ... pushed
out a strand of gooey white filament. It stuck to the
edge of the pipe.
 Ax did the same.
 Well, this is certainly
disgusting. I said. Ready,
Ax?
 Yes.
 Then . . .
Yeeeeee-Haaaaahhh!
 I sprang from the lip of the pipe into the darkness.
It was so totally Spiderman.
 I fell slowly down, down, down, twisting and
turning my way down the pipe. Behind me a long
white string grew. It braked my fall, so that I
was dropping in slow motion. The spider eyes were not
bad at seeing in the relative dark. A bit of
moonlight followed us down part of the way as
we dropped.
 And then it started being fun. I kicked away from the
side of the pipe and cartwheeled through the air. My
web looped around Ax's, and soon we were weaving a
weird silk rope.
 It was cool in a way . . . till I felt a
certain emptiness.
 Ax! I'm running out of web.
 Yes, me, too.
 How far do you think we've
dropped?
I don't know.
 You know which way is northwest but you
don't know how far we've dropped? We could still have
two stories to g. I said.
 I think our plan has a minor
flaw. Ax said with his usual understatement.
But we are very light, small
creatures. We should survive a fall. So should the
others in cockroach morph.
 Maybe. See, the problem is,
there's only one way to find out if we'll
survive. By dropping.
 Ax didn't say anything.
 0h, man. I groaned.
I cut the strand of web.
 And I fell. Down through the darkness, toward a
landing I could only hope wouldn't kill me.
It was a long drop.
 Aaaaahhhhhhh!
 Aaaaahhhhhhh!
 WHAP! WHAP!
 We hit something hard. We bounced. We hit
again.
 WHAP! WHAP!
 You okay? Jake called
down.
 0h, yeah, I'm great.
I said. I fell about a billion feet
and landed on a steel trampoline. Couldn't be
better.
 Sarcasm. Rachel commented
coolly. He must be okay.
 Laugh now, Rachel. We'll see
how much you laugh when it's
your
turn.
The plan was for Ax and me to create a silk cable the
others in cockroach morph would be able
to climb down. That way, they wouldn't all have to go
spider. Not that it would have helped, anyway.
 We're coming down. Jake
said. When we reach the end of the silk
we'll jump. If you two survived, we will.
Nothing kills a cockroach.
 Why don't you stand right beneath me,
Marco? Rachel suggested. You can break my
 Ax and I scurried out of the way. A few
seconds later, after they had clambered down to the end
of our silk . . .
 WHAP! WHAP! WHAP! Three cockroaches
landed nearby.
 Where are we? Jake
asked.
 lt's pretty dark. Who
knows? I answered. lt's a
heatingstair-conditioning vent, I guess. Erek said it
would be part of the furnace system. Supposedly we
go west a hundred feet or so, then drop down,
then go across the furnace, then down again, then right.
Then we're at the edge of the High Security
Room, where the real trouble starts.
 Excuse me? Did someone
say furnace? Cassie asked.
 Yeah. I said furnace.
 Does it occur to any of you that the
furnace might actually come on?
Cassie said.
Not till right this minute.
I said.
 lt's not very cold ou.
Rachel pointed out.
 0kay, I've
seriously
changed my mind. I said. Let's go home.
 Of course, no one listened to me. We scrabbled
along the steel floor, two spiders and three
cockroaches. Our rough claws seemed to make a
horrible din on the metal, scuffing and scratching.
But it probably wouldn't have sounded like anything to a
human.
 As we ran, there was more and more dust on the floor
of the vent. It was weird, like walking through dried
leaves. My eight legs kicked through it, and it
swirled behind me as I passed. Eventually the dust
became as thick as a carpet, although in reality it was
probably no more than a few
millimeters thick.
 Every ten feet or so there would be a grilled opening.
Through the massive upright bars I could see offices.
The light in the offices was very dim, just the glow of
computer screen savers and red or green function
lights. But it helped us to find our way through the
darkness of the vent.
 Then . . .
 What's t? Rachel
yelled. She was the farthest back. Uh-oh. Something coming! I feel the vibrations!
Something big!
 She took off. I took off. We all took
off.
Now I could feel the vibrations, too. Quick,
confused-sounding footsteps. And a dragging sound, like
something was being hauled.
I ran. To my left, another spider. Ax.
Ahead of
me, two roaches, almost as big as I was.
Rachel
was just back to my right.
I couldn't exactly turn and glance over my
shoulder. I had no shoulder. And I had no
actual head to turn. So I paused,
spun around, and in
the dim light from a vent, I saw it.
Huge. Twenty times my size! A vast,
horrible
menace.
Arat!
I yelled. lt's a RAT!
The thing I'd heard dragging was its naked tail and
furred abdomen. It was hungry, and it was after us.
And, unfortunately, it was faster than me.
 Go! Go! Go! lt's
gaining! I yelled.
We blew at top spider and cockroach speed.
Which seems really fast when you're an inch
long, but isn't really that many miles per hour. A
rat can do maybe five or six miles per hour.
A spider is lucky to break one mph.
We'll have to morph back!
Jake said.
Not in here! Cassie
cried. Not enough
room.
Next vent. Jake said.
We go out through the next vent.
The next vent was about ten feet away. I
couldn't turn around to look at the rat, but every hair
on my spider body told me it was just inches behind
me.
 Yet there was something else making my hair tingle,
too. Something about the breeze . . .
 YAAHHH! I heard
Jake yell.
 A split second later, my spider legs were
clawing air. It was like a Roadrunner cartoon.
I zoomed out into space, seemed to hang there with my
little feet motoring away, and then I fell.
 0h, yes. Ax said
calmly. Erek mentioned we had to go down
again.
WHAM! WHAM! WHAM! WHAM! WHAM!
 We hit steel again, and each impact sent dust
clouds swirling.
 Keep running! Cassie
cried, and fortunately, for once, I didn't
argue.
 Buh-Booooom!
 The rat dropped behind us! It was still after us!
Fortunately, it was a little stunned by the impact,
whereas we were outta there!
 Suddenly, ahead of us, the steel floor
opened up again. But instead of a drop into darkness, there
was a weird, vast plain of jagged spires. Each
of the spires was steel, three times as tall as my
little spider body. Each metal spire opened at
the top. There were hundreds of them, all arranged in
perfect rows. A foul smell, something
my spider mind knew nothing about, came from this
field of spires.
 A weird, flickering glow lit the landscape.
In the eerie light, it looked like some awful
graveyard, with the spires like industrial-strength
gravestones or something. I mean, it was creepy.
 What is th? I asked.
 Let's just get going, all
right? Rachel suggested. We
can sightsee some other time.
 I would never have walked into that "field" if the rat
hadn't been just two feet back and gaining again. I
didn't need spider senses to know there was danger
here. It screamed danger.
 I stuck out one spider leg and touched the top of the
nearest spire. Then another and another. I walked
from spire to spire, carefully, cautiously. The
cockroaches crawled and squirmed through the valleys
between spires. Unable to stand normally, they
had to drag themselves inch by inch.
 What is th? I asked
again.
 You don't want to know.
Jake said grimly. lancet's just get out
of here, okay?
 Right then it hit me. From the tone of Jake's
thought-speak voice.
 0h, man. This is the furnace,
isn't it? These spires . . . the holes in the
tops of them . . . it's where the gas comes
ou!
 Not if no one turns on the
heat. Rachel said grimly.
Over my head now, I saw the source of the
eerie glow. It was the pilot light. It was a jet
of
blue flame as long as my body. I could feel the
heat from it, even though it seemed to be as far
above my head as the ceiling of a cathedral.
The rat, smarter than we were, decided to stop at
the edge of the furnace. But there was no going back.
We had to cross the furnace. We had
to hope the Matcom Corporation was into energy
conservation and didn't waste heat. We had
to
pray that no one had messed with the thermo
stat.
Because if the heat came on
...
 HISSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS!
 Gas!
The gas blew with hurricane force up through the tops
of the spires. In seconds the gas would
rise to the pilot light. In seconds the entire
land
scape would erupt in flame!
I thought I'd been moving as fast as I could
move.
I was wrong. I had a whole extra speed.
Ahead of me I saw Jake, Rachel, and Ax
all reach safety. Only Cassie and I were still
deadly inches away from safety.
 RUN! RUN!
RUNRUNRUNRUN!
 HISSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS!
 Then . . . WHOOOOOOSH!
Fuh-Wwwuuuummmp!
The whole world seemed to explode around
me. A wall of flame
...
a hurricane of hot air.
I was blown head over heels, somersaulting
through air as hot as an oven.
JL somersaulted backward, hit steel floor
again, and screeched like a skidding car. I plowed
straight into Jake, and a split second later,
Cassie plowed straight into me.
 Cassie! Cassie! Are you
okay? Jake asked.
 Yes, yes. I think so. Who can
tell with this roach body?
 l'm okay, too. I said.
You know, just in case anyone cares.
 I guess they like to keep this building
nice and warm, eh? Rachel said.
 That was very close to being a
disaster. Ax said. We should
thank the rat. If he had not chased us, we would have
been crossing those gas jets several seconds
later.
That was not a nice picture to think of. We would have
fried, sizzled, and popped open faster than we could
even try to think about de-morphing.
 That would have left a big wad of
Marco mass floating in Z-space.
I muttered. I could joke about it, but I was
quivering inside.
 The rest of the trip through the heating and air-conditioning
system was calm. But that just gave me time to think about
the close call. One second slower, and I'd have
gone out as a roasted spider.
 There are walls up here.
Jake warned from the head of our little pack of singed
bugs. No, wait, not walls. Like a
maze. Like Erek said.
 We traveled through a series of switchbacks,
around a steel panel, then back around another. It
was a light-blocking system. It would block out every
last photon of light that might come through the vent.
 Then we came to the edge of a drop. Beyond it, I
knew, was the High Security Room itself -- the
location of the Pemalite crystal.
 We were six feet up. We had to drop, and then
stay within two feet of the wall. Any movement
farther toward the center of the huge room, and we would
set off pressure sensors in the floor.
 By this time, we were used to falling.
 Next I want to try
jumping out of a plane.
Without a parachute. I said as I stepped
into
the black void.
It is an eerie experience falling in total dark
ness. You have no idea where the floor is. It's
al
most like you're not falling at all. Until you hit
the bottom, that is.
Stay close to the wall.
Jake reminded everyone. Hug the wall
and demorph.
I was relieved to be human again. But my human
eyes were no better than spider eyes at pen
etrating the darkness. It was darker than any
night. Darker than hiding in a closet at
midnight.
This was the darkness of being buried alive.
"There could be six Hork-Bajir standing three
inches away, and we wouldn't know it," I said, in a
whisper that seemed to be deadened by the
darkness itself.
"That's a nice thought," Rachel said dryly.
Even a single photon of light would
set off
the light sensors. Ax said. This is complete
darkness.
"And according to Erek, if we stepped two feet away
from the wall, we'd run into a maze of
ultrasensitive wires. Any contact and the alarm
goes off. We have to travel forty feet without
touching a wire. Without touching the floor or ceiling
or walls," Jake reminded us.
"Let's morph. We'll be able to see then,"
Cassie said. "Or maybe not see, exactly, but
you know what I mean."
 What she meant was that we would be able
to echolocate. Kinda like the dolphin morph. We
would be able to make very fast, ultrahigh sounds that the
human ear would not even hear.
 Those sounds would vibrate off any solid
object and send back a sort of sound picture.
 At least, that's what we hoped. We had been
planning to practice and find out if it was true.
Instead, we were morphing without any knowledge of what we were
getting into.
 "Someday we'll think all this is funny," I
said. "You know, if we happen to live long enough."
 I focused my mind on the bat morph
we had each acquired. They aren't as creepy as people
think. Certainly not as creepy as morphing a
spider. This particular bat was very small, just a few
inches long. It looked like a mouse, with huge ears
and the face of a Pekinese dog. If you forgot about the
leathery wings, it was just another basic mammal.
 But this was one case where the weirdness wasn't
something you saw. I couldn't see anything. Nothing.
I couldn't see myself shrinking, the ground rushing up
at me. I couldn't see the way my legs shrank
to almost nothing and brown fur sprouted from my body.
I couldn't see the way
my fingers grew so long and a paper-thin leather web
filled the spaces between them.
 I saw none of it. I didn't even know I was
a bat, until my bat brain sent an order for
me to open my mouth and chirp out a pulse of sound.
 I fired a string of superfast sound pulses. Like
making a loud machine-gun sound, only a lot
higher, and way, way faster.
 And then . . .
 Whoa, ho! I said.
 The entire black, pitch-black, invisible
room, had just lit up.
 It wasn't like seeing, exactly. It was
like . . . like feeling, almost. Except it was like you were
feeling from a distance. I
felt
a vast room. I
felt
thousands of wires strung taut, up and down, left
to right, at angles.
 And, at the center of the room, beyond the maze of
wires, I
felt
a raised, flat surface, and a sort of pedestal.
There were curling wires coming from the top of the pedestal.
 All that came in a flash. Then it was gone. The
others each fired off their own echolocating blasts,
but I couldn't
feel
their sounds as clearly.
 0kay,
that
is cool. Rachel said. That is way cool.
 The wires seem awfully close
together. Cassie worried. I
wish we'd had time to try out
these wings. I guess all we can do is
hope for the best. Trust the bat to do the flying.
 Abandon yourself to the Force, Cassie
Sky-walker. I said.
 Thanks, Darth. You first.
Me
first? Oh. Suddenly, I didn't
feel at all like laughing. I licked my lips with
my little bat tongue. Assuming I had lips. I
wasn't sure.
 I opened my wings. I spread them wide and
thought,
Well, this should be interesting.
I tested the wings cautiously. They moved
differently than bird wings. More like I was reaching out
with each stroke to grab the air and push it behind me.
 0kay. Here goes.
 I fired an echolocating burst and took off.
 Fired again! There were tight strings all around me!
 Left!
 Left again!
 Down!
 No, up!
 Right, left, right, right, straight up!
 Again and again the high-pitched sound machine
gun fired. Again and again I dodged, millimeters
from a wire.
 It was insane! It was so fast my human brain was
three steps behind. It was instantaneous. It
was impossible! The speed, the agility, the instant
translation of the echolocating blasts.
 And suddenly, I was through! I was through the wires.
 I landed on the table in the center of the room. It was
all over in ten seconds of lunatic flight.
 0kay, now
that
is a roller-coaster ride! Yes! I
said, incredibly jazzed from having made it.
Yes!
 The others came, one by one. I could watch them
fly, seeing them in my echolocating flashes.
 Everyone made it. And we were feeling pretty good
about it, too. It was a rush.
 We did x! I said.
 These bats can fly!
Rachel added.
 ls that the crystal?
Cassie asked.
 Ax fired a burst and said, That must
be it.
 It was no bigger than a grape. It rested on a
small pedestal. Wires -- not the sensor wires,
but curling electrical-type wires, edged in all
around it. But the crystal itself was not attached to anything.
It just lay there, where anyone could grab it.
 It made a low sort of humming noise. I know
it makes no sense, but it was almost like that crystal was
alive.
 Um ... I have a stupid
question. I said. How do we
grab this thing?
For about ten seconds, no one said a word.
 We don't have hands.
Cassie said, pointing out the obvious.
 We can grab it in our
mouths. Rachel said. Right?
Bats eat moths and stuff. They must have pretty
strong jaws. Strong enough to get that crystal back to the
air vent.
 0h, duh. Of course.
Jake said, sounding relieved. l'll do
it.
 I believe that may not work.
Ax said.
 Jake? Cassie
said. Jake? If you have a crystal in
your mouth, how do you fire the echolo-cating
burst?
 At which point we were suddenly no longer fee I
ing so good.
 I believe our plan now has somewhat
of a flaw. Ax said quietly.
 See? We should never get
cocky. Cassie said. lt's
tempting the irony gods.
 Irony gods? Ax
asked.
 Yeah. Cassie said.
The bitter spirits who wait around till you
get cocky, then hammer you.
 These are
real?
 No, of course n.
Cassie said impatiently. How do we
get out of here with that crystal?
 We power our way ou.
Rachel said.
 Ax said, Erek's opinion was that there
were many guards here in this building.
 We didn't see any on
our way through the shafts. Jake remarked.
But Erek's been pretty
accurate so far. I have a feeling if he says there
are guards here, there are
guards
here.
 No choice. Rachel said.
We morph whatever we have that's big,
mean, and nasty, then slam our way out of this place.
 Speaking of irony gods.
I muttered.
 What do you mean? Rachel
asked.
 I mean, we came here to get this
Pemalite crystal so the Chee could be free to be
violent. And now, despite all our clever
planning, all our sneakiness and subtlety, we're
stuck in the end going for total Schwarzenegger.
 Rachel's right. Jake
said. He sighed. We're looking at a
fighting retreat.
 Cassie said, I think there's a door
over there. Try echolocating. You'll see
a raised rectangular outline. I think it's a
door.
 Yep. Jake agreed.
Morph out, keep that direction in mind.
Remorph, and be ready to haul butt for that door.
Head for any way out of this building. Don't stand and
fight, just try to force your way past anyone who comes
after us.
 It was times like this I was glad Jake was our
so-called leader. We all knew what we had to do,
but someone had to actually
say
it. And boy, was I glad it wasn't me.
 I have such a bad feeling about
th. I muttered.
Have you ever watched those old war movies where the
Americans would be heading for some enemy beach? You
know, they'd be in a little boat, riding through the surf,
getting ready to jump out on a beach that was going to be
chewed up by machine-gun bullets and mortars?
 That's what this felt like. Like we were pretty calm
now, but in a few seconds it was going to be life and
death. Things would happen very fast. And none of it was
going to be good.
 I morphed back to human. Then I
focused my mind on the morph I liked for
fighting.
 It was still absolutely dark, so I didn't see
my body grow big and hairy. But I could feel
my shoulders bulk up beyond anything any
bodybuilder ever even dreamed of. I could feel the
strength. Strength like no human could ever possess.
It was comforting to think that I was stronger than three,
four, maybe five strong men. But not even the
gorilla is invincible.
 Everyone ready? Jake
asked.
 There in the darkness, near enough to touch, but invisible, was
enough power to shred a small army. Jake was in his tiger
morph. Cassie had gone wolf. Rachel was one
of the few animals mightier than my gorilla:
She was a full-grown, massively powerful
grizzly bear. And Ax ... well, Ax was Ax.
And trust me, when you've seen an
Andalite in battle, you know that tail is all he
needs.
Ready? Why, I'm looking forward
to it. I
said, trying to sound like I wasn't scared silly.
l'll go first.
Rachel said. And before anyone had time to object . .
.
 HHHRRRRRAAAAWWWWRRR!
Rachel barreled past me, hitting me and
practically spinning me around like a top.
A microsecond later. . .
ScreeEEEEET! ScreeEEEEET!
ScreeEEEEET!
The alarm was deafening.
The others barreled after her. I hesitated for
just a moment while I felt in the dark for the Pemalite
crystal. Aside from Ax, I was the only
one with hands.
Then I went after them. I plunged wildly into
total darkness with a tiny crystal in my massive
fist.
Rachel tore a path through the alarm wires, and I
could feel where she had gone. I slammed
into Ax, then bounced into Jake, then sud
denly
-
WHAM!
-
hit the wall.
ScreeEEEEET! ScreeEEEET!
ScreeEEEET!
Ka-Rrrrunch! A loud, screeching, tearing
noise.
Sudden light! I could see.
Man, it was a relief to be able to see some
thing at least.
Dim light came through the door. Or what was left
of the door, after Rachel had given the door a thousand
pounds or so of mad, ready-to-fight grizzly.
The door was splinters. It was steel, and it was
still
splinters.
 I saw a flash of orange and black, moving
fast but almost delicately -- Jake, in tiger
morph. Cassie the wolf followed him. Right behind
her was the one animal that wasn't from anywhere on
Earth.
 There was a hallway outside. Jake said
Left! and we went left.
 Past doorways, past offices, past normal
things like copiers and computers and fax machines and
desks and cubicles, we ran. Rachel was in the
lead, a huge, lumbering truck on four legs.
Her roars mixed with the endless scream of the alarms.
 ScreeEEEEET! ScreeEEEEET!
ScreeEEEEET!
 Suddenly, another door, a dead end. Rachel
hit it with her shoulder, and the door was gone. There was a
big room beyond. High ceilings, open space, a
lobby sort of room. Windows! I could see faint
stars through the tinted glass.
 Escape was just a hundred feet away.
 Freedom! Life!
 And all that stood in our way was twenty men:
human-Controllers, armed with automatic rifles.
 And behind them, two dozen or more Hork-Bajir
warriors.
Rachel's bear had very poor vision, especially in
this dim light. Hork-Bajir? she asked. Yep. I said. How
many? Too many. Way too
many.
 DcreeEEEET! ScreeEEEEET!
ScreeEEEET!
 The alarm was howling. And then, a far worse sound:
 Cha-Klick!
 The human-Controllers had cocked their rifles,
chambering a round. If they fired, we'd be
blown apart before we could twitch.
 A human-Controller stepped out in front. She
was a nice-looking, middle-aged woman wearing
normal street clothes. She had bleached blond
hair. She could have been someone's grandmother.
 "S. The Andalite bandits," she said. Her
face was twitching with tension, but she tried to sound
calm. "You've done me a big favor. When I
turn you over to Visser Three he'll promote
me two grades. Maybe three!"
 0r he may decide to destroy you
for letting us get this far. Ax said
coolly.
 "Surrender. You can't escape," the woman
snapped. "I'd rather take you alive, but the Visser
would still be happy to have your corpses."
 We stared at her. And we stared at the muzzles
of the twenty automatic rifles that were leveled at
us.
 I held up my hand. Between my thick, brute
fingers I held the Pemalite crystal.
 The woman turned as pale as her hair.
"Give me that."
 I shook my big gorilla head.
 "Lower those guns," the woman snapped.
 "What?" some guy behind her yelled. "We have them!
We have them cold!"
 The woman's jaw twitched again, but she stayed in
control. "What do you think a bullet would do to that
crystal?"
 "But the odds that a bullet would hit the crystal
... It's not going to happen."
 The woman smiled grimly. "That crystal is
worth more than the mother ship and everything in it," she said.
Then she started yelling. "You want to shoot? Go
ahead, fool! If you hit the crystal, you can
explain it to Visser Three."
 She got a grip on herself while the guy who
had spoken out decided he was not interested in
explaining anything to Visser Three.
 "All human-Controllers, back. Weapons
on safety," the woman snapped.
 The rifles faltered, then lowered toward the ground.
But I knew better than to breathe a sigh of
relief. See, I knew what was coming next.
 The woman looked right at me and smiled.
"Hork-Bajir, forward."
 The Andalite who'd given us our powers had told
us that the Hork-Bajir had once been a gentle,
decent race before they were all enslaved by the
Yeerks. All Hork-Bajir were Controllers
now.
 But it was hard to believe the Hork-Bajir had
ever been the sweethearts of the galaxy. They were death
on two legs: seven feet tall, eight, if you
counted the forward-raked blades that protruded from the
top of their snake-heads. They had blades at their
elbows, blades at their wrists, blades at their
knees. They had huge claw-feet like
tyrannosaurs, and a short, thick tail that ended in
cruel-looking spikes.
 They were walking razor blades. All sharp
edges and lightning speed.
 I've fought Hork-Bajir before. And I can
count. Two dozen Hork-Bajir was at least a
dozen more than we had any hope of defeating.
 Then, behind the Hork-Bajir, beyond the retreating
human-Controllers, outside the building,
staring horror-stricken through the glass, I saw
Erek.
 Erek, who could do nothing at all to help us. Who
was helpless to do anything but witness our slaughter. I
felt like throwing up. The fear was all over me. The
fear was surging through me, washing over me, drowning me
from inside and out.
 We were going to lose.
 We were going to die.
 And life, any kind of life almost, is so much
better than being dead.
 "Attack," the woman said. Her voice was
nearly a whisper.
 The Hork-Bajir leaped forward, a wall of
slashing, whirling blades.
 Right in front of me!
 SEEEEWWW!
 A huge Hork-Bajir slashed and a bright red
line cut across my black leather chest!
 I swung my fist and hit the Hork-Bajir
hard enough to fold him in two. But another leaped over
him and came at me. I blocked his arm, but he
kicked at me with his clawed foot.
 I fell back. I looked down and saw a
hole in my stomach.
 A hole! I could see the gorilla's insides!
My insides. My insides!
 Ahhhhh! I screamed in
thought-speak, as the gorilla bellowed in agony.
The Hork-Bajir leaped on top of me. I
swung again and knocked his legs out from under him. He
toppled down, but landed beside me. My left
hand went to his throat and I squeezed. I
squeezed with all the strength I had. The
Hork-Bajir slashed at me again and opened a gash
in my hairy arm. But I kept my grip tight.
 I screamed as the Hork-Bajir twitched and
scrabbled wildly and began to jerk
uncontrollably.
 The battle raged all around me.
 Screams. Cries. Bellows of animal
rage. The garbled roars of the Hork-Bajir. Even
the guttural roar of the human-Controllers, who
watched and cheered the Hork-Bajir on.
 I saw Jake leap through the air and close his
jaws around a Hork-Bajir's face.
 I saw Rachel swing her paw and open up a
Hork-Bajir like someone cleaning a fish.
 I saw Cassie dodging swiftly, biting,
backing away, lunging to bite again, red foam flying
from her muzzle.
 And Ax, striking again . . . again . . . again with the
deadly speed and perfect accuracy of his Andalite
tail.
 But we were losing. It would be over in a few
seconds. We were losing.
 0h, God!
someone screamed. Maybe it was me, I don't know.
Help! Help! Get him off
me!
 Look ou!
 No! Nooooo!
 It was all one combined thought-speech scream.
 And still the alarm howled its screeEEEEET!
 I felt my grip weaken on the throat of the
Hork-Bajir. But it didn't matter anymore.
It was safe to let him go.
 My vision was red. Red and fading.
 I felt a sharp stab as another Hork-Bajir
sunk a blade into my gorilla heart.
 None of it mattered, though. It was all coming to an
end ... all coming to an end. . . .
 Through a red mist I saw a face on the other
side of the glass. Erek. Somehow, in the battle,
I had ended up not far from the wall of windows.
 Erek was just a few feet away. Just on the other
side of the glass.
 I felt something hard in my palm. The crystal.
 I crawled. A vicious Hork-Bajir
kick, and I went sprawling right against the glass.
 0h . . . no. I said.
I could see the damage the kick had done.
I was dead. I could feel my brain shutting down.
 Human-Controllers were closing in around me,
hammering me with the butts of their rifles.
 With my last ounce of strength, I rammed my
fist through the glass.
I felt strong fingers pry open my hand. I felt
the fingers lift out the crystal.
And then . . . later, much later, someone
slapped my face.
"Morph back, Marco. Morph back! Do it!"
 -L woke up on the ground. Not a floor, the
ground. Dirt and leaves.
 I sat up very fast. I looked at my body.
 "Human!" I said. I wanted to cry from the sheer
relief of being myself again. Myself and alive.
 I looked around. Jake. Cassie. Rachel.
Ax. All there! All human! Except for Ax,
of course.
 Tobias was perched in the tree above us.
 Someone else was there, too. I heard a voice
sobbing.
 "You okay, Marco?" Jake asked.
 "Yeah. Yeah. Oh, man. Man, I was so
close to being dead!"
"You were," Jake said solemnly. "He gave you
an electric shock to start your heart again."
 "Who did?"
 Jake jerked his head toward the source of the crying.
It was Erek, sitting in the dirt with his head down.
 "Where are we?" I asked.
 "Little bunch of trees, just down from Mat-corn.
Or what's left of Matcom."
 "How did we get here? How did we get out of
that place? We were toast!"
 Cassie came over and sat beside me. "You saved
us by getting the crystal to Erek. He used it. He
rewrote his programming. He's the one who . .
." She looked away. "He . . ."
 "He took care of the Hork-Bajir," Rachel
said. "I saw some of it. I was still conscious."
 I was confused. "How did Erek take care of the
Hork-Bajir?"
 He destroyed them all.
Ax said.
 I almost laughed. "Erek took out two dozen
Hork-Bajir?"
 No one laughed with me. Erek had stopped sobbing.
I thought,
Why would a robot cry?
 AII the Hork-Bajir.
Ax said. AII the
human-Controllers. All of them.
 I stood up. I could see the Matcom
building. It was only a few hundred yards
away. There was a big hole in the front glass.
I had a very bad feeling
about what was on the other side of that glass.
 All I could think of to say was,
"All
of them?"
 "It lasted about ten seconds," Rachel said.
She closed her eyes, trying not to remember what
she had seen. But I guess the images weren't
easily shut out. She opened her eyes again, and to my
utter amazement, I saw tears.
 That's what brought the horror home to me --
Rachel's tears.
 lt was extremely
brutal. Ax said. Very
brutal, and very swift. He carried us here. He
revived you. He even reattached my arm.
 I saw a scar on Ax's left arm.
 "He hasn't said anything since then,"
Cassie said sadly. "He won't talk to any of
us."
 "He saved us, though, right?" I said.
 "Yeah," Cassie agreed, smiling a deeply
sad smile. "He saved our lives. And lost his
own soul."
 I went to Erek. I wanted to thank him. I
wanted to tell him he'd done what was right. He'd
beaten the bad guys. Saved the good guys.
 He stood up as I came over.
 "You okay, man?" I asked him.
 He looked at me with holographic human
eyes. Maybe he had to
choose
to make them cry. Maybe he had to choose to give
them that empty, hollow look. I don't know what
the connection is
between the android Chee and his projected human body.
But his expression answered my question.
 No. Erek was not okay.
 "You saved our lives, Erek," I said.
 "How do you . . . how do you live with the memory?"
he asked me.
 I knew what he meant. See, win or lose,
right or wrong, the memory of violence
sits inside your head. It sits there, like some lump
you can't quite swallow. It sits there, a black hole
that darkens hope, and eats away at everyday
happiness like a cancer. It's the shadow you take
into your own heart and try to live with.
 I shrugged. "I guess I try not to think about
it. I try and forget. And after a while, the
nightmares don't happen as much."
 Erek put a finger to his head. "Android," he
said. He made a bitter, ruined smile. "I
can't forget. See? I can never forget . . .
anything."
 I looked at him. Already in my own human
mind, the memories of that night's horror were
fading. The flash of blades and the pain and the sickening
feeling of my fist closing around the
Hork-Bajir's throat . . . they were being covered
over by scar tissue.
 What if I could never forget?
 What if all those memories were fresh forever?
I realized then why the Pemalites had forbidden their
creatures to kill. The Chee lived forever. Forever was
a long time to remember what Erek had done.
 "I'm sorry," I said.
 Erek nodded. "Yes." He held out his
clenched fist, palm down. I knew what he was
doing. I didn't want it. But I held out my
own hand, and took the Pemalite crystal from him.
 "I've changed my programming back," Erek
said. "We ... I ... maybe at times I can
tell you things. Information. But I'll never fight
again. I can't join this war, my friend."
 He walked away. We went to our homes and
crawled into beds our parents never knew we'd
left.
 I was beyond exhausted. But I couldn't sleep.
Too many images. Too many memories. And I
was afraid of the nightmares.
 There are evil things in life, and I guess there
are times when a human being has to fight those evils.
 I closed my eyes and wandered lost and afraid
through my nightmares.
 And already, my mind was forgetting.
Teah! Yeah! Go boy!"
 Homer ran flat out, kicking up divots of sand
as the Frisbee soared over his head. With a burst of
speed, Homer got out in front of the Frisbee,
jumped, pivoted in midair, and snatched the disc
out of the air. His jump carried him to the water's edge
and he landed in the surf.
 "Yeah! Good boy!" Jake said.
 "Not bad," I said. "He's not quite that Frisbee
dog we saw on TV, but he's not bad."
 "Hey, that was a
professional
Frisbee dog. Homer's just in it for the sport.
Homer doesn't even have any endorsements."
 Homer came trotting back across the sand with the
Frisbee in his mouth.
It was a week after our battle for the Pemalite
crystal. Jake and I were at the beach. Tobias was
high overhead, riding the thermals. I didn't know
where the others were.
 And my hair had finally grown out a little. But
I'd gotten used to having it shorter. I decided
to keep it that way, just to spite everyone.
 There weren't that many people on the beach because it was a little
too chilly for lying out. Instead, people came down and
flew kites, or walked along, looking for sand
dollars and shells. And they played with their dogs.
 Jake knelt down and tried to take the
Frisbee from Homer. But Homer, like just about every dog
in all of history, refused to give it up.
 "They just don't get the point of this whole
game," I said. "You throw, they catch,
they bring it back for you to throw again. Why is that so
hard to figure out?"
 Jake scratched right behind Homer's ear, and
Homer dropped the Frisbee. "Oh, they know how
to play the game, all right," Jake said with a laugh.
"For them, the game is "I throw, they catch, they
bring it back, they get a good head scratch,
then
they give up the Frisbee.""
 But just then, Homer lost all interest in the
Frisbee. Two dogs were trotting by, tails in
the air. Homer jogged over to greet them. They
sniffed each other by way of introduction, then took
off,
running like the giddy, happy, always-excited, dog
goofs they were.
 It made me smile to watch them.
 "It must have been a nice place," I said.
 Jake knew exactly what I was talking about.
"Yeah. A planet where the people were as sweet and
decent as dogs. Yeah, that would have been okay."
 "I ran into Erek at the 7-Eleven yesterday,"
I said. "I think he was looking for a place to
"accidentally" run into me. Anyway, he gave
me a phone number. He says it's an
absolutely safe phone. He says the Yeerks
couldn't tap it or trace it if they tried."
 "Yeah? So?" Jake asked.
 I shrugged. "So, he says if we ever need him
we could leave a message at that number. And if
he has something to tell us, he'll record a
message for us."
 "Huh," Jake grunted. "Think anything will ever
come of it?"
 "I don't know," I said honestly. "But I
think the Chee are going to go on fighting the Yeerks.
They'll just be doing it in their own way."
 I reached into my pocket and drew out the small,
diamondlike crystal. "I still have this, by the way.
I don't know what to do about it. Erek didn't even
want to talk about it. But this is the
most powerful computer ever created. It could rewrite
the Ghees' programming. It could take over every
computer on Earth. The Pemalite crystal. We
almost died getting it. What am I supposed to do with
it?"
 Jake and I stood there, looking down at more power
than any human had ever held in his hand.
 Suddenly, I realized we weren't alone.
 Homer and the other two dogs were standing right
in front of us, watching us. I know this sounds
crazy, but I swear some flicker of intelligence
appeared in those laughing dog eyes.
 The three of them looked at us, and we looked
back.
 I held out my hand, palm up, to show the dogs the
crystal. Homer scarfed the crystal out of my hand as
if it were a dog biscuit. But he didn't
swallow it, just held it in his teeth, where it
glittered like a diamond.
 The three dogs turned and ran down the beach.
They ran into the surf and splashed out into the water,
paddling for a dozen feet or so.
 Then they came back to shore, and had a glorious
time shaking themselves violently and spraying water all
over two old ladies who were hunting shells.
 Maybe someday the Pemalite crystal will wash
back up on some beach somewhere. Maybe
by the time it does, we'll be as wise as the race that
created it.
 "Homer!" Jake yelled. He threw the
Frisbee.
 And all three of the dogs, happy, silly,
loving fools that they were, went racing after it.
Don't; miss
 It was crowded inside the Bug fighter.
Especially because Ax takes up a lot of room.
 But we huddled together and looked over Ax's
shoulders as he worked the controls. And we looked
past Ax, out through the transparent panels at the
front of the Bug fighter.
 This ship is very difficult
to handle. Ax said. The
design is strange. Some controls are
psychotronic. But others require physical
handling. Unfortunately, those controls are designed
for Taxxons. They have more hands than like.
 "Can we do anything to help?" I asked.
 Someone should take the weapons
station. Ax said.
 "Cool," Marco said. He leaped forward, but I
was closer.
 I slipped into the area beside Ax. Ax's pilot
"seat" wasn't a seat at all, of course.
Taxxons are like huge centipedes, so they can't
really sit. Which was good, because Ax doesn't sit,
either.
 But the weapons station was built for
Hork-Bajir. Hork-Bajir are seven feet
tall and have thick, spikey tails, but they do sit.
 "No
way
you should handle the weapons," Marco said, leaning over
my shoulder. "I kick your butt in video
games."
 "Yeah, right," I said. "In some alternate
universe, maybe."
 "Grab the joystick," Marco suggested.
 As strange as it seems, there actually was a
joystick. It was for much bigger hands than mine, and the
two buttons on it were clumsy to reach. But it was a
joystick.
 "Maybe I should test the weapons," I said
to Ax.
 Yes. he said tersely,
distracted.
 We were rising up through the atmosphere. We were
above the clouds already. I could see brief flashes
of the lights of the city down below, but mostly it was
clouds and more clouds.
 But we weren't rising as fast as I would have
expected. Ax was definitely working to control the
ship.
 I looked ahead, saw nothing in the way, and
pressed one of the buttons on the joystick.
Nothing.
Ax glanced over. That was the safety.
The Dracon beam should be armed now. See the screen
before you? The red circle is how you aim. Use a
combination of moving the joystick, but also use your mind.
 Marco put his hand on my shoulder. "Phasers
on full power!" he said in a Captain Picard
English accent. "Arm photon torpedoes! If the
Borg want a fight, we'll give them one!
Make it so!"
 I moved the joystick and watched the target
circle track across the screen. It still showed nothing
but starry sky. That should be safe enough.
 I squeezed the second button.
 TSEWWWW! TSEWWWW!
 Twin red beams of light fired forward, converging
too far away for me to see.
 "Yes! Most splendid!" Marco yelled.
 "Okay, that
was
cool,"
I admitted, trying not to cackle like an
idiot with his first video game.
 "Boys with their toys," Cassie teased gently.
 Prince Jake? Ax said.
I must apologize.
 "Why?"
 I did not at first realize: This Bug
fighter's cloaking field is not working.
 It took a few seconds for me to track on
that. "You mean . . . people can see us?"
 The clouds will hide us from people on the
ground. Ax said. But
human radar will observe us. In fact, they have already
observed us.
"Uh-oh. Maybe we better get higher," I
suggested.
 Yes. But we are rising slowly. I
don't know why. And there are two objects
approaching us.
 "Probably just airliners," Rachel said.
 The objects are moving at
one-and-a-half times the speed of sound.
Ax said.
 "Okay, that's not a passenger plane," Marco
said.
 I groaned. "Military jets. Oh,
man, it's the Air Force after us. They're "good
guys." They're on our side. We can't shoot
them down."
 Suddenly . . .
 SWOOOOOSH!
 SWOOOOOSH!
 Two pale gray jets blew past us. The
backwash rattled the Bug fighter.
 I can access their radio
signals. Ax said. And a second later
we heard the voice of one of the pilots.
 "Urn . . . Base Control, I ... um
... Bogie is of an unknown type. Say again,
unknown type."
 "Definitely unknown," the other pilot said.
"Way unknown."
 "We're coming around for another pass."
 I looked at Ax. "We really don't want
to get shot down by a couple of F-sixteens."
 No, Prince Jake. That would be
embarrassing. I believe I now know how to increase
com
FAH-WHICH 0000000 M!
 Suddenly, we were outta there. Out of the clouds. Out
of the atmosphere.
 "Yes! This thing can move!" Marco exulted.
"We need to buy this game."
 We heard a fainter, crackling voice over the
radio. "Did you see that? Did you see that thing
move, Colonel? Did you see that? What the -"
 Then we were out of range, still zooming straight up
into black space. Below us I could see the
curvature of the earth. It looked just like one of those
pictures the shuttle astronauts take from up in
orbit.
 "That's so beautiful," Cassie said. "Look
at that! You can see daylight coming up over the Red
Sea."
 Excuse me. Tobias
said, but I don't think the Red Sea
is exactly on the way to Washington, D.c.
 "Yeah, I guess not," I said. Although it was such
a wonderful sight that I almost didn't want
to worry about where we were going. "Ax, maybe we'd
better slow down, get some idea of where Washington
is and -"
 No! No! Ax snapped.
 I was shocked. Ax is always polite.
 No, Prince
Jake. he said, a little more calmly.
We cannot slow down.
 "What's the matter?" Cassie asked him.
Ax pointed at one of the view screens before him.
On the screen I saw stars. Then the moon came
into view, a vast gray-and-white lightbulb.
 And silhouetted against the glowing moon was a shape.
It was like some medieval battle-ax. The rear half
was a two-headed blade. From the middle, like an ax
handle, extended a long shaft. At the end of the
shaft was a triangular head, very much like an arrow's
point.
 It was black on black. And even if you had
never seen it before and had no idea what it was, you'd
know right away it was death.
 I
had seen
it. I stggnew what it was.
 "The Blade ship," I whispered.
 The Blade ship of Visser Three.